 

 

 

 

 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

Study guide 

cid:image002.png@01CFA5C0.385FF3B0 


 

PROGRAMME: Master of Business Administration 

 

LEVEL: NQF Level 9 

 

CREDITS: 10 credits 

 

NOTIONAL HOURS: 100 hours 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright © 2016 

REGENT Business School 

All rights reserved; no part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, including photocopying 
machines, without the written permission of the publisher. 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

I Introduction to the Entrepreneurship Study Guide 

 

 

 

PAGE 

2 

Integrated Exit Level Outcomes & Assessment Criteria 

 

5 

Chapter 1 Introduction to Entrepreneurship 

 

11 

Chapter 2 Organisational Management and Performance 

 

33 

Chapter3 Integration of Entrepreneurial and Business 

 Management Processes 

 

62 

Chapter 4 The Role of Innovative Entrepreneurship in the 

 National Socio-Economic Development 

 

90 

Chapter 5 The Environmental Factors 

 

111 

Chapter 6 Government and Society 

 

123 

Chapter 7 Achieving Organisational Objectives 

 

153 

Chapter 8 Competitive Advantage 

 

169 

Chapter 9 The Nature of Family Business 

 

188 

Chapter 10 Business Plans 

 

209 

Bibliography 

 

222 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

INTRODUCTION TO THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP STUDY GUIDE 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 


The ENTREPRENEURSHIP module is a core part of the Masters in Business Administration 
(MBA) programme. Upon successful completion of this module you will be able to proficiently 
and adeptly utilise the content offering to embark upon entrepreneurial and management 
practices in your role as an entrepreneur and as a manager. You will also gain a detailed 
understanding of how the application of various management tools and business management 
processes applies to the market. An understanding of entrepreneurship and its effect on society 
from a socio-economic development point of view, as well as expectations of government, is 
crucial to the success of a present day MBA student. Entrepreneurship may be viewed as 
the capacity and willingness to develop, organise and manage a business venture along with 
any of its risks in order to make a profit. The most obvious example of entrepreneurship is the 
starting of new businesses. In economics, entrepreneurship combined with land, labor, natural 
resources and capital can produce profit. (www.businessdictionary.com) Entrepreneurial spirit is 
characterised by innovation modernisation and risk-taking. 

 

Entrepreneurship is an essential part of a nation's ability to succeed in an ever changing and 
increasingly competitive global marketplace. Africa needs to encourage and grow its young 
entrepreneurs in order to ensure that the continent can compete in a global market and add to 
the world economy. 

 

1.1. How to use this guide 




This guide should be used in conjunction with the recommended textbook(s). You should read 
about the topic that you intend to study in the appropriate chapter of this study guide before you 
start reading in detail in the recommended textbooks(s). 

 

1.2. Objectives 




At the commencement of each chapter you will find a list of objectives. These objectives 
outline the main points that you should understand when you have completed the chapter 
with the accompanying section(s). 

 


 

2. Structure of this Study Guide 


 

This Study Guide is structured as follows: 

 

Introduction to Entrepreneurship Study Guide 

Provides an overview of the Entrepreneurship 
Study Guide and how to use it. 

Overview of Entrepreneurship Curriculum 

This part of the Study Guide details what you 
are required to learn. 

Each section details: 

. Specific learning outcomes 
. Essential reading (textbooks and journal 
articles) 
. An overview of relevant theory 
. Questions for reflection 


1. 

Introduction to Entrepreneurship 

2. 

Organisational Management and Performance 

3. 

Integration of Entrepreneurial and Business Management 
Processes 

4. 

The Role of Innovative Entrepreneurship in the National Socio-
Economic Development 

5. 

Environmental Factors 

6. 

Government and Society 

7. 

Achieving organisational objectives 

8. 

Competitive Advantage 

9 

The Nature of Family Business 

10 

Business Plans 

Case Studies 

You are required to prepare and analyse these 
case studies. All activities must be completed. 

Activities 

 

 

 

3. Structure of Each Section1 


 

Each section of this Study Guide is structured as follows: 

. Specific Learning Outcomes 
. Essential (Prescribed) Reading 
. Brief Overview of Relevant Theory 
. Questions for Reflection 


 

3.1 Specific Learning Outcomes 

The specific learning outcome is listed at the beginning of each section. These detail 
the specific outcomes that you will be able to competently demonstrate on successful 
completion of the learning that each particular section requires. 

 




 

3.2 Essential (Prescribed) Reading 

 Your essential (prescribed) reading comprises the following: 

. South African Textbook 


Rwigema, Urban and Venter (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town 

. Recommended 


Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria 

Strydom J. (2012) Entrepreneurship and how to establish your own business. 4th edition Juta. 
Cape Town 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C, (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town 

These textbooks will provide you with an understanding of Entrepreneurship and 
General Business Management within the South African context. 

 

. Journal Articles 




Journal articles on Entrepreneurship are available from the EBSCO, Emerald and 
Sabinet databases that are accessible through the http://myregent.com website. These 
journal articles will provide you with an understanding of Entrepreneurship and 
Business Management. 

 

3.3 Brief Overview of Relevant Theory 

Each section contains a very brief overview of theory relevant to the particular 
Entrepreneurship and Management topic. The purpose of the overview is to introduce 
you to some of the general and emerging market issues regarding each topic. Once 
you have read the overview, you need to explore the topic further by reading the 
prescribed textbooks and journal articles listed under “Essential Reading” for each 
section. 

 

3.4 Questions for Reflection and Case studies 

At the end of every section there are questions for reflection. You need to attempt these on 
completion of your study of the entire section. The questions are designed to enable you to 
reflect on what you have learnt, and consider how this should be applied in practice. 

 




https://www.eonetwork.org/PublicPictureLibrary/tfl-model.jpg 


Case studies form an integral part of developing competence and provides the benefit from 
exposure in Entrepreneurship. You are required to discuss and analyse these case studies 
in your study groups. 

 

3.5. Assessments 

The formal assessment of Entrepreneurship takes the form of a Capstone Project and an 
examination. 

 

 

 

 

(www.google.com) 

 

 

 

 




 

 

 

 



ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

INTEGRATED EXIT LEVEL OUTCOMES & ASSESSMENT CRITERIA 

 

 

The exit level outcomes and assessment criteria for the ENTREPRENEURSHIP module are 
listed in the table. 

MBA 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP Module 

NQF Level 

NQF 9 

Credits 

10 

Exit Level Outcome 1: 

 

 

The learner will be able to: 

Understand entrepreneurship and evaluate the role of 
entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial characteristics in 
organisational management and performance. 

 

Assessment Criteria: 

 

1.1 Define entrepreneurship. 

1.2 Outline the characteristics of an entrepreneur. 

3.1. Discuss popular myths of entrepreneurship. 
3.2. Evaluate personal factors that impact 
entrepreneurial direction. 
3.3. Recognise the skills which enhance 
entrepreneurial performance. 
3.4. Evaluate the role of entrepreneurial characteristics 
in organisation management and performance. 






 

 


 

MBA 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Module 

Exit Level Outcome 2 

 

 

 

 

The learner will be able to: 

Integrate entrepreneurial and business management 
processes to enhance the performance of the 
organisation. 

Assessment Criteria: 

2.1. Explain the concept of entrepreneurial 
processes. 




 

2.2. Identify and discuss business management and 
business management processes. 




 

2.3. Define and critically discuss organisational 
performance. 




 

2.4. Establish how the integration of entrepreneurial 
and business management processes 
enhances organisational performance. 




 

Exit Level 

The learner will be able to: 

 

Outcome 3: 

 

Analyse and understand the critical role of innovative 
entrepreneurship in the development of a country’s 
socio-economic development. 



 

 

 


 

 

 

Assessment Criteria: 

 

 

 

 

3.1. Define and explain innovative 
entrepreneurship. 




 

3.2. Explain the link between ideas and 
opportunities. 




 

3.3. Evaluate the role of innovation and 
creativity. 




 

3.4. Discuss the approach taken to 
recognise opportunities. 




 

3.5. Discuss the importance of innovation 
as a dimension of entrepreneurship. 




 

3.6. Describe the steps in the creative 
process. 
3.7. Explain the components of a feasibility 
plan. 




 

3.8. Establish the socio-economic needs of 
countries. 




 

 

3.9. Analyse the critical role of innovative 
entrepreneurship in the development 
of a country’s socio-economic 
development. 




 



 


 

Exit Level Outcome 4: 

The learner will be able to: 

Demonstrate a broad understanding of micro and macro 
environmental factors and understand the demands of 
government and society on entrepreneurs. 

 

Assessment Criteria: 

 

4.1. . Define the micro and macro environment. 




 

4.2. Critically evaluate the impact of micro and 
macro environmental factors on the 
management and performance of a business. 




 

4.3. Outline business management processes. 




 

4.4. Explain the expectations of government and 
society. 




 

4.5. Explain the dimensions of business growth. 




 

4.6. Describe the stages of growth in the business 
life cycle. 




 

4.7. Distinguish between growth strategies. 




 

4.8. Contrast business decline with business 
failure. 




 

4.9. Identify early warning signs of pending trouble. 




 

4.10. Explain the causes of business failure. 




 

4.11. Distinguish between different methods of 
harvesting. 




 

4.12. Conceptualise the importance of aligning 
business management processes with the 
requirements and expectations of government 




and society. 




http://cdn-media-1.lifehack.org/wp-content/files/2014/04/entrepreneur.jpg 


 

Exit Level Outcome 5: 

 

 

 

The learner will be able to: 

Demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s 
resources and processes to achieve organisational 
objectives as well as integrating the company’s 
entrepreneurial processes to achieve competitive 
advantage. 

Assessment Criteria: 

 

5.1. Identify the company’s resources and 
processes 




 

5.2. Describe organisational objectives. 




 

5.3. Identify differences in strategic outlook between 
small businesses and large organisations. 




 

5.4. Discuss the strategies available to 
entrepreneurial ventures. 




 

5.5. Demonstrate the ability to manage the 
company’s resources and processes to 
achieve organisational objectives. 




 

5.6. Discuss the process of opportunity 
identification. 




 

5.7. Describe the gathering of resources. 




 

 

5.8. Discuss the establishment and management of 
ventures in ensuring competitive advantage 






 

 

 

 

 

 

 (www.google.co.za) 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


CHAPTER 1 

INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of the field of ENTREPRENEURSHIP and management 
from a South African and global perspective. This overall outcome will be achieved through the 
learner’s mastery of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

1. Define entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship. 
2. Discuss the role of entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs. 
3. Explain the concept of management and analyse its functions. 


 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

 

Textbooks 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapter One 

Rwigema, Urban and Venter (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C, (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 

 

1.1 Introduction to Entrepreneurship 




The purpose of this module is to encourage and stir the entrepreneurial spirit in the learners, so 
that they can go into their communities and form new companies, develop existing businesses 
and create the much needed jobs for their countries. In this chapter we learn the meaning of the 
word entrepreneurship and distinguish it from intrapreneurship. We focus on entrepreneur. 

 


 We conclude the chapter by posing the question, “Who can be an entrepreneur?” The simple 
postulation is “Anyone who is willing to be an entrepreneur and make the necessary sacrifices 
can be an entrepreneur”. 

1.2 Entrepreneurship defined 

There are many definitions of the word entrepreneurship. The more comprehensive definition by 
Timmons, Smollen and Dingee (1990:5-6) is that Entrepreneurship is creating and building 
something of value from practically nothing. That is, entrepreneurship is the process of creating 
or seizing an opportunity and pursuing it regardless of the resources currently controlled. 
Entrepreneurship involves the creation and distribution of value and benefits to individuals, 
groups, organisations and society. Entrepreneurship is very rarely a get-rich-quick proposition; 
rather it is one of building long-term value and durable cash flow streams. (Note the key words 
in the definition, which are in italics for emphasis). Entrepreneurship involves creating and 
building something of value e.g. a business enterprise or company. Note also that the quantity 
of resources held has little bearing on entrepreneurship. Whilst resources are important, their 
absence does not necessarily stop entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship benefits individuals, 
groups, organisations and society through the provision of goods and services. 
Entrepreneurship is about building long-term value and durable cash flow streams. 
Entrepreneurship can be developed. People can be stimulated and activated to be 
venturesome, creative and dynamic. The entrepreneurial spirit can be developed. 
Entrepreneurship is the creation of an innovative economic organisation for the purpose of gain 
under conditions of risk and uncertainty. (Dollinger.1995:7) Entrepreneurship may be further 
defined as the capacity and willingness to develop, organise and manage a business venture 
along with any of its risks in order to make a profit. The most obvious example of 
entrepreneurship is the starting of new businesses. Entrepreneurial spirit is characterised by 
innovation and risk-taking, and is an essential part of a nation's ability to succeed in an ever 
changing and increasingly competitive global marketplace. (www.businessdictionary.com) 

1.3 Entrepreneurs 

We have established the concept of entrepreneurship, the next question we have to tackle is, 
“Who are entrepreneurs?” We will look at two definitions that will help clarify the term. 
Entrepreneurs are skilled at identifying new products, new methods of production or new ways 
of marketing existing products. They set up operations to provide new products, market the 
products and arrange the financing of the operations (Niewenhuizen & Strydom, 2007). This 
definition emphasises that entrepreneurs are skilled people in the identification 

 


http://www.seedsa.org.za/uploads/images/logoe.jpeg
of new products, new methods of production and marketing. Having identified these 
opportunities, they set up operations to exploit these opportunities. Entrepreneurs find a niche 
or a gap in the market and take the opportunity to fill that gap by providing that service or 
product. This skill can be in-born or developed by reading books, magazines and learning from 
others. 

1.3.1. Creation of an enterprise 






Entrepreneurs are people with the ability to create an enterprise where none existed before. 
They produce combinations of ideas, skills, money, equipment and markets that form a 
successful enterprise. The emphasis on this definition is the creation of an enterprise 
(Niewenhuizen et al., 2007). An entrepreneur can therefore be described as someone who: 

. Starts his/her own enterprise 
. Manages his own enterprise 
. Buys an existing enterprise 
. Identifies new products or opportunities 
. Is creative and/or innovative 
. Organises and controls resources (like capital, 
labour, materials) to ensure a profit 
. Has the ability and insight to market, produce and 
finance a service or product; 
. Is willing to take calculated risks 


The common view is that a person who starts and 
establishes any enterprise, not necessarily an enterprise that shows high levels of innovation, is 
an entrepreneur. We pose the question, who can be an entrepreneur? The answer is anyone- 
regardless of age, race, gender, colour, national origin or any other characteristic can be an 
entrepreneur. They need the drive, the energy and other characteristics that are valuable to an 
entrepreneur for success. We will look at these characteristics in Chapter Two of this guide. 

1.3.2. Richard Maponya: South African Entrepreneur 






It has always been Richard John Pelwana Maponya's dream to see Soweto grow its own 
flourishing economy. Born in Limpopo Province on 24 December 1926, Maponya is a property 
developer best known for building a business empire despite the restrictions apartheid imposed 
on black South Africans. He was fiercely determined to see Soweto develop economically. 

 


Aged 24, Maponya – a teacher at the time – took a job as a stock taker at a clothing 
manufacturer. The manager sold Maponya soiled clothing and off cuts, which he then resold in 
Soweto. He eventually saved enough capital to open a clothing retailer in Soweto, despite being 
denied a licence under apartheid laws restricting business ownership for black South Africans. 
He had even hired the law firm of Mandela and Tambo to help him obtain the licence. 

Undeterred though, he continued his life's journey towards entrepreneurial greatness. In the 
early 1950s, Maponya and his wife Marina (a cousin of Mandela) established the Dube Hygienic 
Dairy, which employed boys on bicycles to deliver milk to customers - who didn't have access to 
electricity or refrigeration - in Soweto. 

In the 1960s, Maponya was a founding member and first president of the National African 
Federated Chamber of Commerce (Nafcoc), and the founder and chairman of the African 
Chamber of Commerce. By the 70s, his clothing empire had grown, and he had begun to 
branch out into other areas: general stores, car dealerships and filling stations. His most 
recognisable development though has been Soweto's Maponya Mall. On 27 September 2007 
Nelson Mandela officially opened Maponya Mall, one of the largest shopping centres in the 
country. 

Maponya secured the land on which the mall is situated in 1979, first on a 100-year lease. Then, 
in 1994, after several attempts, he acquired it outright. Continuing to grow Soweto's economy, 
Maponya also established Maponya Motor City on Klipspruit Valley Road in Orlando East. The 
development included a Volkswagen and Toyota dealership respectively. At that time former 
Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe said the development was "another milestone for Soweto 
by the Maponya Group as they continue to build sustainable world-class businesses in Soweto". 

Maponya Motor City was the first such business in the south of Johannesburg, and now the 
Maponya Group's ventures include property development, horse racing and breeding, retail, 
automotive sales, filling stations and liquor stores.(www.mediaclubsouthafrica.com) 

1.4. The new face of business leaders 

When you think of business leaders, your mind typically conjures up images of people like 
Microsoft magnate, Bill Gates, American business tycoon and investor, Warren Buffet and 
successful founder of Amazon.com, Jeff Bezos. But the business landscape is changing and so 
are the leaders driving that change. 

 


 

Business leaders are no longer only defined by pedigree university degrees and recognised 
family lineages. Today, profitable businessmen and women are beginning to emerge as 
ingenious entrepreneurs who rank in the top 5% of cognitive ability in the world. And these 
talented individuals are found in the most unlikely of places. This article unveils some 
inspirational stories from a few of South Africa’s most creative entrepreneurs who have 
identified a need in local markets and have found unique ways to meet those needs. 

1.4.1. Uncovering South Africa’s hidden entrepreneurial talent 

South Africa has witnessed an upsurge in the number of young talented individuals who have 
considered opportunities in the market and have been successful. 

1.4.1.1. Lesika Matlou (27 years old): CEO of Ek Sê Tours 

Inspired by a radio interview about the Awethu Project (a South African business incubator that 
helps develop local entrepreneurs), Lesika packed his belongings and moved from Rustenburg 
to Johannesburg. When he arrived he didn’t have a place to stay or a steady income, but he 
was determined to succeed. With the support of the Awethu Project, he started Ek Sê Tours in 
2011, a tour operator specialising in unique township tour experiences. Today, Lesika is an 
experienced guide, has seven full-time employees, has secured financing for his first vehicle, 
and is making more than R40 000 monthly in profit. 

1.4.1.2. Ludwick Marishane (22 years old): Founder and Chief of Headboy Industries 

According to the Global Business Network, Entrepreneurs’ Organization, Ludwick Marishane is 
the best student entrepreneur in the world. Ludwick started businesses as a teenager in 
Limpopo. Many failed, like his own brand of biodiesel, healthy cigarettes and a security 
magazine. In 2009, he started Headboy Industries, a business that designs and commercialises 
new products and services in South Africa. He is South Africa’s youngest patent-holder after 
having invented DryBath – the world’s first bath-substituting solution, which he presented at a 
TED Conference in Johannesburg in 2012. 

1.4.1.3. Colin Thornton (35 years old): Founder and Managing Director of Dial a Nerd 

While pursuing a degree in computer science at the University of Witwatersrand, Collin 
Thornton dropped out of school and began raising funds for what is now known as the million-
dollar computer repair company, Dial a Nerd. Colin founded Dial a Nerd in 1998 at the age of 
19. His first computer repair room was in the garage of his parent’s home and clients were close 


friends and family. By focusing on home users and offering a high level of service, he occupied 
a niche, which helped Dial a Nerd grow into the business it is today. His company has a 
presence in most major South African cities, with five branches and over 70 staff members 
countrywide. It has over 40 000 customers consisting of home-based computer users and small 
to medium-sized businesses. 

1.4.1.4. Vuyokazi Ngalo (38): Owner of Wonga Designs 

In 2009, Vuyokazi began designing and sewing her own clothes in her spare time. Two years 
later she started her own business, but her monthly revenue was seldom more than R1 000. 
Today, with the help of the Awethu Project, she has hired her first full-time employee and is 
generating revenue of about R20 000 per month. Vuyokazi’s progress is set to continue with her 
designs showcased at the 2013 International Fashion Sale at the Gallagher Conference Centre. 
She has also recently secured financing from the Small Enterprise Finance Agency (SEFA) to 
assist with a new marketing campaign. 

1.4.1.5. Ashley Uys (29 years old) Founder and Managing Director of Real World 
Diagnostics 

Ashley has a BSc Honours Degree in Biotechnology and a Management Advancement 
Programme (MAP) certificate from the University of Witwatersrand. He founded Medical 
Diagnostech in 2010, a company that develops and markets affordable and reliable medical test 
kits for malaria, pregnancy, syphilis, malaria and HIV/Aids for Africa’s rural communities. Each 
test kit costs R4, effectively bringing reliable diagnosis into the hands of millions of people who 
face these illnesses every day. Having won the South African Breweries Innovation Award and 
listed as one of Forbes’s 30 Under 30: Africa’s Best Young Entrepreneurs in 2011, Ashley 
continues to research and develop new and affordable products, among them a pre-diabetic 
test. (www.disovery.co.za) 

 

1.5. Intrapreneurship defined 

Intrapreneurship is the same as entrepreneurship except that it is practiced in an existing 
organisation. Intrapreneurship involves the definition, creation and distribution of value and 
benefits to individuals, groups, organisations and society by one or more people working within 
an existing organisation. It is a process in which organisations encourage entrepreneurial 
characteristics in their own managers. 

 


 

The intrapreneur is a revolutionary within an organisation – challenging the status quo and 
fighting to change the system from inside the organisation. Most organisations however require 
that the intrapreneur should seek for permission before attempting to change anything in the 
organisation. One advantage of intrapreneurship over entrepreneurship is that there are more 
resources available to the intrapreneur, which can be applied to the opportunity identified. 

1.6. The Importance of intrapreneurship 

Changes in organisations are taking place faster than ever before. Organisations are finding it 
increasingly difficult to compete. They are looking to intrapreneurs to take on their competitors 
by creating new businesses in new markets. As competition intensifies so does the need for 
creative thinking. Creativity is needed both at the strategic and operational levels to effect the 
changes that competition demands. 

1.6.1. Factors that discourage intrapreneurship 

There are many factors that discourage intrapreneurship. 

. The costs of failure are too high 


There must be some element of tolerance to failure. This is not to say organisations should 
simply condone failure but rather that organisations must measure and attribute failure to either 
the intrapreneur’s fault or circumstances beyond the intrapreneur’s control. Appropriate action 
can be taken afterwards. 

. The rewards for success are too low 


The rewards for success are usually not enough because very few organisations provide 
adequate rewards for success. In most cases the rewards are less than those available to 
entrepreneurs. The incentive systems need to be reviewed upwards. 

. Unwillingness to change 


Most organisations have a culture of resistance to change- afraid of the unknown. This 
attitude of unwillingness to change or entertain new ideas frustrates intrapreneurs trying to 
challenge the status quo. 

 

 

 


 

1.6.2. Advice to the intrapreneur 

Intrapreneurial employees are advised to be: 

. Courageous 
. Modest risk takers 
. Flexible 
. Creative 
. Humble, asking for permission to use company resources. 


 

Entrepreneurship is the process of starting a business, typically a startup company offering an 
innovative product, process or service. The entrepreneur perceives an opportunity and often 
exhibits biases in taking the decision to exploit the opportunity. 
(www.google.co.za/entrpreneurship) 

 

The South African Institute for Entrepreneurship helps to address poverty and unemployment 
through entrepreneurially focused initiatives. With over 15 years of experience in developing 
innovative (experiential-based) training materials, the SA Institute for Entrepreneurship 
promotes a positive mindset in youth and adults, and assists in the creation of effective 
entrepreneurs and enterprises. 

The SA Institute for Entrepreneurship utilises original, creative methodologies and trains 
educators, trainers, co-operatives and community-based organisations to convey business 
skills, uncover entrepreneurship qualities and ensure sustainable economic development and 
wealth creation. (www.entrepreneurship.co.za/) 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

Read the article below and argue the contention that publicist extraordinaire Farah Fortune of 
African Star Communications built her business not by courting big clients, but by backing 
young up-and-comers, and growing her brand right alongside theirs. 

 


 

Farah Fortune:-Company: African Star Communications, Established: 2008 

The 36-year-old publicist launched her celebrity PR business in 2008, with R1 000 in her pocket 
— she spent R589 of that on registering a CC and the rest on business cards. From working on 

her bedroom floor and sharing two-minute noodles with her daughter as she struggled to 
survive, today African Star Communications represents high-profile rappers such as K.O and 
Solo, and stand-up comedians Loyiso Gola and Jason Goliath. 

She has an office in Nigeria and plans to open two new offices in Botswana and Ghana. 

You pulled yourself up by your bootstraps. How did you overcome the hurdles? 

I lost my first business to a crooked partner in 2006. I was determined to try again and I went in 
search of funding, but no-one would give me money. When the last thing I had to feed my child 
was a mouldy piece of cheese, I went back to work for a PR company, earning R12 000 a 
month, managing accounts worth millions. I hated every minute of it. In June 2008, when my CC 
registration came through, I walked out the door. 

My first pitch was for a small charity day that AIG hosted for Manchester United in 
Johannesburg. I was the only woman in the reception area, but my offer to do the job for R10 
000 was irresistible and I signed my first client. That was just the beginning of a long struggle. I 
was broke for the next three years. Friends bought my groceries, and I would feed my daughter 
and have her leftovers for dinner. I couldn’t afford petrol so I walked from my house in Randburg 
to do pitches in Sandton in my takkies, and then changed my shoes at the client’s office. The 
only thing that kept me going was the belief that I could somehow make it work. 

What was your big break? 

In year three rapper AKA was about to release his first album. He pursued me for four months. 
Initially, I didn’t want to work with him, but his ambition won me over. I’ve never regretted the 
decision. We signed a contract, and shortly after that more clients came my way, mostly for 
small events. Working with AKA made me realise that my passion was for music and I decided 
to channel my energies into promoting South Africa hip-hop stars. That’s how I ended up 
specialising and finding my own niche in the crowded PR sector. Our team convinced 
8ta/Telkom to look at AKA for their ads and it worked. I branched into corporate PR after the 
celebrity side took off. 


What made your business stand out from other PR companies? 

First was affordability. Publicists do not come cheap. I signed up many young artists who had 
not yet hit the big time, and charged them as little as R4 000 a month to manage their publicity 
and help make them famous. Taking on lots of small clients meant that I could spread the risk. 
We still structure our packages according to what clients can afford and I’ve kept the overheads 
low. To this day, I’ve never advertised. Second was my focus on hip-hop. Before 2011, 
Corporates were not interested in rappers and the scene was very much underground. I 
convinced Vodacom to sponsor a big hip-hop party with AKA as the star attraction. After that, 
many other Corporates woke up and took advantage of the popularity of the local rap scene. I 
like to think I played a part in mainstreaming South African hip-hop. 

How have you stayed relevant in a fickle industry? 

Once the business was pumping, I built my own brand. I never planned to be in the spotlight, 
but the more I appeared in the media, the more I was able to build my clients’ profiles, and get 
bigger accounts. I focused only on doing business-related interviews and people started to take 
me more seriously. I could not believe how many corporate contracts I did not win because I 
refused to sleep with the client. It’s a disappointing reality of this business when you are young 
and female. Developing my own brand helped me to build a career based on respect and 
professionalism. 

 (www.entrepreneurmag.co.za) 

1.7. Female Entrepreneurs 




Africa is increasingly becoming known as a viable economy to invest in and this is largely due to 
the success of entrepreneurial ventures. Entrepreneurship is not only about building and 
running your own business, but it’s also about offering a solution to a problem as well as having 
the passion and perseverance to see it through. 

1.7.1 Passion and Perseverance 

The following female entrepreneurs have many common characteristics but none more so than 
the two vital elements of passion and perseverance. Here’s a closer look at some of South 
Africa’s top female entrepreneurs. (www.sageone.co.za) 

 

 


 

1.7.1.1. Basetsana Khumalo – Executive Chairman & CEO of Basetsana Woman 
Investment Holdings (Pty) Ltd 








Well-known for her string of Beauty Queen titles, Former Miss South Africa and Miss World 
runner up Basetsana Khumalo has become a household name thanks to her fierce 
entrepreneurial mind and talents. Starting out by selling sandwiches at local soccer games, it 
was clear that Basetsana was gifted with a keen eye for business from a young age. During her 
reign as Miss South Africa in 1990, Basetsana became a TV presenter on a popular local 
show, Top Billing. It was then that she quickly turned her fame into fortune by beginning to build 
her brand. In 1995, she became a joint shareholder of Tweselope Productions, the production 
company that housed Top Billing and later went on to become JSE listed, making Khumalo one 
of the youngest black female directors in South Africa. Khumalo went from strength to strength 
when she launched her own clothing, eyewear and cosmetics range that reached over 250 
stores on the Sub-Saharan region. She is currently the President of the Business Women’s 
Association of South Africa and has won numerous accolades for her continued efforts and 
commitment to developing the South African economy. She is also the Executive Chairperson of 
Tweselope Productions. 

1.7.1.2. Lynette Magasa– Founder and chief executive of Boniswa Corporate Solutions 








Born in Swaziland, Magasa began her professional career as a receptionist for a leading 
defence technology corporation. After completing her studies in Human Resources, Magasa 
was then promoted and found her true calling in telecoms. Together with her husband and 
funding from the National Empowerment Fund (NEF), Magasa created her telecoms start-up in 
2004 and is now the proud owner of one the most successful black-owned telecoms businesses 
in Africa – Boniswa Corporate Solutions. The business is operational in Gauteng, Mpumalanga, 
the Eastern Cape, Limpopo, as well as Swaziland, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. A 
BEE-compliant company, Boniswa Corporate Solutions has won several awards, including the 
BBQ 2013 Trade and Investment KwaZulu-Natal New and Innovative Business award. 
Magasa’s impressive business acumen and perseverance was acknowledged when she won 
Business Women of the Year in 2013. 

1.7.1.3. Shellie Roodt – Founder and Managing Director of IWESCO, Mpumalanga 

Iwesco was founded in 1997 and has since grown to become one of the leading industrial waste 
management businesses in the country. Providing its clients with consolidated waste and 
environmental management solutions, as well as contract cleaning services, Iwesco is 


expanding at a rapid pace and is far ahead of its competition. Shellie Roodt created a solution 
for South Africa’s waste management problem. Hesitant at first, mainly because industrial waste 
management was initially not a widely accepted concept in South Africa, she surged forward 
and ended up walking away with both the Top Gender Empowered Company and Top Woman 
Entrepreneur awards at the Top Women Awards in 2012. 

 

Roodt piloted her next project, Adopt- a-Road, in 2012. This initiative attempts to combine 
enterprise development with the BEE scorecard. Franchises will be sold to individuals who in 
turn will be sponsored by the private sector. The businesses who partake in this initiative will 
earn points towards enterprise development and this allows the franchisee to run a profitable 
business while simultaneously creating jobs. Currently in collaboration with the Johannesburg 
Roads Agency and the Tshwane Metro, Roodt believes that in time, this initiative will give 
municipal workers the time to focus on more important areas of service delivery. 

1.7.1.4. Khanyi Dhlomo – Founder and Managing Director of Ndalo Media 

Receiving her head start in her media career at the young age of 20, Khanyi Dhlomo is 
presently the Managing Director of Ndalo Media which she founded in 2007. Collaborating 
with Media 24, she is the head publisher for two of the most successful South African 
magazines: Destiny and Destiny Man. Always miles ahead of her competition, Dhlomo has also 
crossed over to the digital sphere by creating the online media site, Destiny Connect. Seen as a 
media power house on a global scale, Dhlomo was noted as one of Africa’s most successful 
women by Forbes Magazine in 2011, and has received awards for Magazine Editor of the Year 
as well as Most Influential Woman in South African Media. In 2015, Forbes Magazine wrote that 
the key to economic growth lies in supporting and promoting female entrepreneurs. In the 
meantime, South Africa’s economy continues to grow as these female-run businesses expand 
and flourish. (www.google.com) 

 

1.7.2. A comparison between male and female entrepreneurs 






 

Characteristic 

Male entrepreneurs 

Female entrepreneurs 

Motivation 

. Achievement – strive to make things 
happen 
. Personal independence 
. Job satisfaction arising from the 
desire to be in control 


. Achievement – the 
accomplishment of a goal 
. Independence – to do it alone 


Departure point 
(activities when 
venture is started ) 

. Dissatisfaction with present job 
. Discharge or retrenchment 
. Opportunity for acquisition 


. Job frustration 
. Interest in and recognition of 
opportunity in the area 
. Change in personal 
circumstances 





 

Sources of funds 

. Personal assets and savings 
. Bank financing 
. Investors 
. Loans from friends and family 


. Personal assets and savings 
. Personal loans 


 

Occupational 
background 

. Experience in line of work 
. Recognized specialist 
. Competent in a variety of business 
functions 


. Experience in area of business 
. Middle management or similar 
level of experience in the field 
. Service-related occupational 
background 


Personality 
characteristics 

. Opinionated and persuasive 
. Goal oriented 
. Innovative and idealistic 
. High level of self-confidence 
. Enthusiastic and energetic 
. Must be own boss 


. Flexible and tolerant 
. Goal oriented 
. Creative and idealistic 
. Medium level of self-confidence 
. Ability to deal with social and 
economic environment 


Background 

. Age when starting venture 25 – 35 
. Father was self employed 
. College educated – degree in 
business or technical 
. First born child 


. Age when starting venture, 
usually 35 - 45 
. Father was self employed 
. College educated – degree in 
liberal arts or similar 
. First born child 


Support groups 

. Friends and professional colleagues 
. Business associates 
. Family and networks 


. Close friends 
. Spouse 


Type of business 

. Manufacturing or construction 


. Service – related – educational, 
consulting or public relations 




Source: Hisrich and Peters (1998) in Beaver (2002: 145) 

 

1.8. Management 




Management is the process of using organisational resources to achieve organisational goals 
effectively and efficiently through planning, organising, leading and controlling. An organisation 
is a collection of people who work together and coordinate their actions to achieve a wide 
variety of goals. An efficient organisation makes the most productive use of its resources. An 
effective organisation pursues appropriate goals and achieves these goals by using its 
resources to create the goods or services that customers want. It is important to understand the 
relationship between organisation and management. 

 

1. Managers 






 Managers need to make decisions and the way in which they are made is significant to 
company success. The nature of communication and its function in an organisation must also 
be considered. An understanding of motivation and the various motivation theories is crucial to 
entrepreneurs. Creating an organisational culture and the management thereof is necessary. In 
South African companies, attention must be paid to workforce diversity and the management 
thereof. Managers who are entrepreneurs must demonstrate knowledge of groups and teams in 
organisations and their role in achieving business success. 

 


 

Another part of management is the negotiation process and identifying the components of 
political behaviour in organisations. Against this background, the logic of organising and its 
relationship to other managerial functions must be explained. 

 

2. Management Functions 






Within the organisation, management achieves the goals of the enterprise through acting on its 
human, financial, physical and informational resources by executing the four central 
management functions of Planning, Organising, Leading and Controlling. These four functions 
comprise the core management process: 

. Planning involves determining which goals and courses of action the organisation and 
the various departments should pursue; 
. Organising involves the structuring and arranging of work, resources, departments and 
the overall organisation in a manner which will facilitate the achievement of 
organisational goals; 
. Leading involves influencing the organisation’s employees so as to ensure that they are 
motivated to perform actions which are aligned with the organisation’s overall goals; 
. Control is necessary to determine whether the organisation’s performance is in 
accordance with the predetermined goals, originally devised during the planning process 


(Smit and Cronjé, 2011) 

 

1.9. The SA Landscape 




The following points reflect the South African scenario. Each point below must be seriously 
considered by all relevant stakeholders in order to create and execute any meaningful change 
to the South African economy. 

• Unemployment hit 26.7% in the first quarter of 2016 

• Much political noise in the build-up to the 3rd August general elections in South Africa 

• Worker’s Unions are powerful, politically and economically 

 •Mining and other industries are under pressure and are likely to shed jobs further 

•The drought in South Africa is starting to bite (food prices.) 

•The proposed NDP 2030 (National Development Plan) has been slow in its implementation 

•There is increasing unrest about a lack of service delivery 


•Real GDP growth is expected to be <1.0% in 2016 

•Global Economy slow, so reduced commodity prices & exports 

•SA has millions of refugees & economic migrants from other African countries 

 

 

Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

By making reference to the article below, in a group, discuss how an entrepreneur can nurture the 
entrepreneurial spirit by focusing on work life balance. 

Doreen Katzen, well-known property broker from Vered estates, explains why work life 
balance is important. 

The making of an entrepreneur 

Doreen Katzen, well-known property broker from Vered estates is driven by three factors – her 
family, her entrepreneurial spirit and her desire to make a difference to others. Somehow she 
has managed to combine all three principles in her different businesses which have spanned 
over 4 decades. Doreen’s entry into the business world began when she started a nursery 
school at the Libanon Mine, providing a service to parents and children while being able to be a 
part of her own children’s lives. 

Career Moves 

Maintaining a leadership role, Doreen then moved to Johannesburg with her husband, Ronnie 
and their children taking up the position as the principal of a nursery school, continuing her 
nurturing role through her service to others. After 7 years, not one to let anything stop her, 
including labour pains, the couple, bought a corporate clothing manufacturing business on the 
night before Doreen gave birth to their fourth. 

However, after being in clothing manufacturing together for 25 years they took a decision to 
close the business as it was not as viable as it had been in the past. 

 


 

Determined to still work together as a team while working with people and providing a service, 
Doreen was drawn to the property industry with Vered, a key player in the residential property 
market. 

Vered Estates and the property game 

“What I love about being in the property game is that you can learn something new every day. 
Every deal is a negotiating and an exciting challenge. You meet so many interesting and lovely 
people and you have the challenge of mediating between a buyer and a seller to ensure 
catering to both of the parties’ interests,” says Doreen who believes in a strong work ethic, non-
negotiable integrity and creating an equitable result for both buyer and seller. ‘There is often a 
lot of tension involved before a deal is concluded, but with the back-up and expertise of Vered 
Estates we have been very happy and successful over the years. Vered has an open door 
policy and our directors are always available for advice and as a sounding board.” 

Lessons Learned 

Doreen is among the fortunate few who has loved all of her three careers. My careers reflect 
different times in my life and each business has given me important skills from organising, 
networking, achieving results to assisting others.“This is the key to my passion and motivation 
after so many years, together with the fact that I am passionate about selling property. 

I love what I do. I love the challenges that I encounter,” says this property dynamo. 

Nine (9) Key Tips for entrepreneurial success 

. Be very focused in what you want to achieve and prioritise everything in terms of that 
goal 
. Have a clear plan of how to achieve your objectives 
. Have systems in place which enable productivity being organised 
. Respect the people from whom you are buying and to whom you are selling 
. Keep all role players in the business in the loop by giving them feedback 
. Always be professional, sincere and ethical in your dealings with people 
. Be consistent in your work and persevere until your goal is accomplished 



. Be economical with your time – have a constant awareness of where spending your 
time will be most effective 
. Love what you do 


These key points need to be factored in as systems in a daily routine. “In our business where 24 
hours in a day is not enough, each moment must be maximised. This means keeping to a strict 
schedule of physical activity, work and most importantly enjoying precious time out with my 
family at least one night of every week, “concludes Doreen. (www.entrepreneurmag.co.za) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 1.1 

Below is a list of 20 personality traits. Consider each carefully – and then rate yourself by placing a tick or cross 
under the appropriate number with 0 being the lowest and 7 being the highest. Add your score and find out what 
kind of entrepreneur you would make, using the key below 

 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

I have the ability to communicate 

I have the ability to motivate others 

I have the ability to organize 

I can accept responsibility 

I can easily adapt to change 

I have decision-making capability 

I have drive and energy 

I am in good health 

I have good human relations skills 

I have initiative 

I am interested in people 

I have good judgment 

I am open minded and receptive to new ideas 

I have planning ability 

I am persistent 

I am resourceful 

I am self confident 

I am a self starter 

I am a good listener 

I am willing to be a risk taker 

Key: 110 -140 Very strong 

 85 – 109 Strong 

 55 - 84 Fair 

 54 or below Weak 

Source: Prepared by Sherron Boone and Lisa Aplin of the University of Mobile, 

in Megginson, Byrd and Megginson (2006:5) 



 

1.1.1. Test your potential as an Entrepreneur 






 

 


ACTIVITY 1.2 

About FOOD LOVER’S MARKET 

Fruit and Veg City was started in 1993 by brothers Brian and Mike Coppin. They worked long 
hours and made many personal sacrifices. Since those humble beginnings the Group has 
grown exponentially with over 130 stores across South Africa and beyond. 

Fruit and Veg. City has always endeavoured to bring customers a wide variety of fresh produce 
at the best possible price, and in recent years they've included groceries. 

The Food Lover’s Markets, the latest store-concept evolution in the Fruit and Veg. journey, have 
already made their mark on the South African food retail landscape with incredible shopping 
experience they provide. 

Fruit and Veg. City have also taken in inevitable step in the direction of service station forecourt 
retail by partnering with Caltex to bring you Freshstop, the fresher take on convenience 

Consider the statements and answer the questions that follow: 

1.2.1. They worked long hours and made many personal sacrifices. 






Define the term “entrepreneurship” and provide an evaluation on the characteristics of 
entrepreneurs as they apply to the Coppin brothers. 

 

1.2.2. The Food Lover’s Markets, the latest store-concept evolution in the Fruit and Veg. 
journey, have already made their mark on the South African food retail landscape 
with incredible shopping experience they provide. 






Discuss the functions of management and provide an assessment of what you believe to 
be the main reasons of success in terms of managerial functions that were executed. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ACTIVITY 1.3. 

Read the article below and justify whether you agree that Millennials make for successful 
entrepreneurs. 

Millennials aren’t keen on waiting; JUNE 16, 2016 

In The Business of Good, serial and social entrepreneur Jason Haber intertwines case studies 
and anecdotes that show how social entrepreneurship is creating jobs, growing the economy, 
and ultimately changing the world. In this edited excerpt, Haber explains why the generation 
born between 1980 and 2000 could be the most entrepreneurial people yet. 

The entrepreneurial nature of the Millennial generation - those born between 1980 and 2000 - is 
stunning. Millennials have disregarded the life and career flowchart that was so formally laid out 
by the Baby Boomers. But Millennials aren’t keen on waiting. It isn’t in their DNA. They don’t 
wait for taxis, they take Uber. They don’t wait for emails, they text. They don’t wait to work up 
the corporate ladder, they start their own business. So it should come as no surprise that they 
have no interest in waiting to make a difference. They inherited a flawed world and have a zeal 
to repair it that’s unique to their generation. It’s as if the generation has been hardwired to 
believe in the fierce urgency of now. 

Everything is about today. The moment. The instant. The Millennials are an on-demand instant-
gratification generation that has become emboldened by technology and molded by world 
events. So if they don’t wait for anything in their lives - why should they wait when it comes to 
making a difference? They shouldn’t. And with social entrepreneurship, they don’t have to. A 
study released in Summer 2014 found that 94 percent of Millennials are interested in putting 
their skills to work to benefit a cause. More than half wished their employer had more programs 
engineered for giving back. Millennials are all about engagement. This fact is reflected in their 
unique brand of activism. In the 1960s, for example, activism was about disengagement -- 
boycotts. Today, Millennials use the inverse approach -- buycotts. “This generation will use 
their role as a consumer to make a point,” indicated philanthropist and investor Jean Case. 

Some say they’ve become the most prized (and perhaps feared) consumer group of all time, 
and their habits are surprisingly different from past generations. Consider the findings from the 
2015 Millennial Impact Project: 

. 84 percent of Millennials made a charitable donation in the past year, and 70 percent 
volunteered for a cause. 



. 48 percent of Millennials have donated to a giving campaign promoted by their employer at 
some point. 
. Millennials are 27 percent more likely to donate to a cause if their manager does, but 46 
percent more likely to donate if a coworker asks them to. 
. Millennial employees find value in using their pro bono skills for good. Most Millennial 
employees volunteer between one and ten hours a year. 
. 77 percent of Millennial employees are more likely to volunteer if they can leverage their skills 
or expertise. 
. Millennials also want to know that their involvement means something. The Millennial Impact 
Project found that 79 percent of Millennial employees who volunteered through a company-
sponsored initiative felt they made a positive difference. 


This generation believes that profit and purpose can go hand-in-hand. Unlike previous 
generations, whose pursuits of money and excess are well documented, Millennials have far 
different goals. It’s no longer simply about making money, and that’s an extraordinary shift in 
thinking. “I think Millennials realize that money as a be-all and end-all doesn’t equal happiness,” 
Scott Harrison, founder of charity: water, has indicated. Scott would know. Almost all of his 80 
percent domestic staff members are Millennials.Millennials are known for turning down well-paid 
internships or jobs in favor of an opportunity that allows them to have a greater impact. Mathew 
Paisner, CEO of AltruHelp, a website that connects aspiring social entrepreneurs to local 
opportunities, noticed that 75 percent of his applicants were willing to decline Fortune 500 
opportunities to instead join his venture. It’s hard to imagine Generation Xers or Baby Boomers 
following the same course of action. They wouldn’t. No other generation would. But Millennials 
are different. The pioneering CEO of Salesforce.com, Marc Benioff, is keenly aware their 
unique composure. “When you look at the Millennials’ value system, what Millennials want, they 
want to have meaning in work,” he said. “They want to understand that the company they’re 
working for is not just building products and selling products.” “We have had a chance to truly 
appreciate the link between the local and the global,” says Alex Swallow, previously chief 
executive of the Small Charities Coalition, and a Millennial himself. “At the global level, we are 
more likely to have traveled abroad, to have friends from other countries, or simply to have 
grown up with the internet for a core part of our lives. At the local level, we are more likely to 
have moved away from our communities. The social enterprise and charity sectors, I think, 
benefit from having people like this who have an understanding of the larger picture.” 


Time magazine labeled the Millennials “The Me Me Me Generation.” It sounded like a stinging 
indictment until you read the subtitle. “They are narcissistic, overconfident, entitled, and lazy, but 
they just might be the new Greatest Generation.” 

Comparing any generation to the members of the Greatest Generation is a tall order. They 
waited on breadlines during the Great Depression, and held the lines at Omaha and in the 
Ardennes. The Greatest Generation has always been held up as the generational exemplar. For 
70 years they were unmatched in their fortitude and in their achievements. Now, for the first 
time, a rival generation has emerged. The challenges it faces are completely different, but in 
many ways they are eerily the same. Both faced an uncertain and violent world, handed to them 
by their forefathers. Both had a strong faith that the best days for our country and for them lay in 
the future. And this new generation, the Millennials, has the verve to make an impact on the 
world larger than any generation that came before it. While accepting his party’s nomination for 
a second term in office, President Franklin D. Roosevelt looked out at the delegates and 
declared, “Here is a mysterious cycle in human events. To some generations much is given. Of 
other generations much is expected. This generation of Americans has a rendezvous with 
destiny.” So, too, can it be said about Millennials. For this generation has its own rendezvous 
with destiny. (https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/271972) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


CHAPTER 2: 
ORGANISATIONAL MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
evaluate the role of entrepreneurial characteristics in organisational management and 
performance. This overall outcome will be achieved through the learner’s mastery of the 
following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

 

1. Outline the characteristics of an entrepreneur 
2. Discuss popular myths of entrepreneurship 
3. Evaluate personal factors that impact upon entrepreneurial direction 
4. Recognise the skills which enhance entrepreneurial performance 
5. Evaluate the role of entrepreneurial characteristics in organisation management and 
performance 
6. Critically discuss organisational management and performance. 


 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters and journal 
articles listed below. 

Textbooks: 

 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapter Two 

Rwigema, Urban and Venter (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapters One and Two. 

 

Strydom J. (2012) Entrepreneurship and how to establish your own business. 4th edition Juta. 
Cape Town Chapter One 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C, (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Two 

 


http://bilalzuberi.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Impressive_Entrepreneur_Qualities_BilalZuberi.jpg 


2.1. Introduction 




Entrepreneurship is a subject of great importance and relevance to any economy, because it 
involves the formation of companies, which supply people with goods and services they need 
and results in the creation of jobs. The South African Institute for Entrepreneurship (SAIE) helps 
to address poverty and unemployment through entrepreneurially focused initiatives. The 
institute was born out of the Triple Trust Organisation (TTO) in 1996 in recognition of the critical 
need for easily accessible business literacy training materials for both the small enterprise 
sector and for schools. With 19 years of experience in developing innovative, experiential based 
training materials, the SAIE promotes a positive mindset in youth and adults across South Africa 
(SA), and assists in the creation of effective entrepreneurs and enterprises. The SAIE promotes 
a positive mindset in youth and adults across South Africa (SA), and assists in the creation of 
effective entrepreneurs and enterprises. The SAIE trains educators, trainers, co-operatives and 
community-based organisations to convey business skills, uncover entrepreneurship qualities 
and ensure sustainable economic development and wealth creation. The institute currently 
works in education, agriculture, enterprise development and information technology. 
(www.entrepreneurship.co.za) 

 

2.2. Qualities of Entrepreneurs 




Entrepreneurs are widely thought to require certain qualities. According to Kuratko and Hodgetts 
(2001:99) the following are prominent: 

. resourcefulness 
. creativity 
. vision 
. independent thought 
. energy 
. optimism 
. innovativeness 
. calculated risk taking 
. leadership skills 
. the ability to recognise and 
exploit opportunities 


 

 


 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

Read the article below and isolate the key entrepreneurial qualities which you believe contribute to business 
success. 

Entrepreneurial Qualities That Contribute to Success; JUNE 9, 2014 

There are entrepreneurs who are extremely successful and everything they touch seems to turn 
to gold, and there are some that do not see as much success. What are the deciding factors 
that separate those that crank home run after home run and those that struggle at the plate? 
While the majority of entrepreneurs have no problem working hard, not all work smart. The 
following entrepreneurial qualities could be responsible for driving success. 

1. Not being afraid of delegating tasks 






 As entrepreneurs, we tend to always have a full plate and feel that we can take on any task. In 
reality, if we keep adding to the already-full plate it is eventually going to collapse and create a 
mess. Don’t be afraid to delegate tasks to an experienced member of your company that has 
the ability to get tasks completed. 

2. Managing time effectively 






 Proper time management is necessary to distinguish between extremely urgent tasks and 
those that can wait. Use a notebook or whiteboard to prioritize your tasks by writing them down. 
Mobile devices and tablets have calendars and notepads, but nothing is more effective than 
actually writing down your “to-do” list. Focus on one task at a time and don’t let new “to-do’s” 
disrupt your focus. Knock them out one at a time. 

3. Visualizing goals and success 






You need to see your goals and success in your mind first if you plan on making them a reality. 
Not only do you need to visualize the end result, but you also need to visualize every step that it 


is going to take to get there. Napoleon Hill said it best: “What the mind can conceive and believe 
it can achieve.” 

4. Listening and communicating well 






If you aren’t a good listener and communicator it will result in miscommunications and wasted 
time, not to mention added work to correct the miscommunications. Time is one thing that all 
entrepreneurs would like more of. How often have you wished there was more hours in a day? 
Avoid wasting priceless time repeating and redoing tasks due to poor communication. 

5. Understanding your time is valuable 






 While it would be great to be able to give everyone the time that they wanted, it would leave 
you with little to no time to accomplish the things that you need to get done. If a sales 
representative has a question, they should address it with the sales manager. If a customer has 
a question they should be speaking with your customer-care representative. While people might 
demand your time, it doesn’t mean that you have to grant them the time. Your time is valuable, 
so don’t waste it on disruptions that should be handled by other members of your organization. 

6. Seeking help when you need it 


 We often let our stubbornness prevent us from asking for help. Have you ever been stumped 
and someone comes along with the answer and you think, “Why in the world didn’t I think of 
that?” Often times a clear mind and different viewpoint can quickly solve a problem or provide 
an answer to a question. Don’t be afraid to ask for help when you need it, as it can also help to 
strengthen the communication within your organization. 

7. Getting out of the office 


 As an entrepreneur, you have probably spent several 18-hour days behind your computer or 
worked through the night late at your office until the sun came back up. It is important to break 
your day up, for both your physical and mental health. Take a few breaks throughout the day 
and walk around the office or take a walk outside to clear your head and give your eyes a break 
from the computer. Leave your office for lunch, even if you bring it -- go eat outside and get 
some fresh air. Want to jumpstart your day and have healthy energy throughout the day? Go to 


the gym bright and early before you hit the office every morning and get a good workout in. You 
will have a clear mind, abundant energy and improved mental focus. 

8. Giving back 


It is important to understand how lucky we are, as entrepreneurs, to do what we love. When you 
are appreciative of what you have accomplished and then take a step back to see what you can 
do to give back, it gives you a feeling like no other. Helping nonprofits is a great feeling. 
Nobody said being an entrepreneur is an easy thing to do, and while these qualities will not 
translate into automatic success, they sure can help. (www.entrepreneur.com/article/234583) 

 

2.3. The personal characteristics of entrepreneurs 




It is not enough to have expertise, skills and aptitude. To enhance chances of success in 
business, business characteristics and management skills are also needed. The following are 
personal characteristics of entrepreneurs that deserve our attention: 

2.3.1. Persistence 






Entrepreneurs have a lot of confidence both in themselves and their enterprises. They press on 
despite setbacks and difficult situations and problems that may arise. They are not easily 
discouraged when they make mistakes or fail. They exercise patience until the task at hand has 
been completed and the goal has been reached. 

2.3.2. Commitment to the enterprise 






Entrepreneurs dedicate their time, skills, expertise and resources to establish and build the 
enterprise. 

They prove their commitment through the following actions: 

. using their own money in the enterprise; 
. borrowing and securing the loan against their house; 
. putting in long hours to ensure the success of the enterprise; 
. accepting a lower standard of living; usually at the beginning; 
. earning little or no income from the enterprise until it stabilises. 


 

 

 


Image result for entrepreneurship 


2.3.3. Involvement in the enterprise 






Entrepreneurs are actively involved in all aspects of the enterprise and are aware of what is 
happening in the enterprise. They communicate with staff, suppliers and clients to ensure the 
success of the business. 

2.3.4. Willingness to take risks 






When entrepreneurs take risks, it must be noted that these are calculated risks. These risks 
must not be excessive, for then the chances of success will be out of the entrepreneur’s hands. 

On the other hand, the level of risks should not be too small as lower risks are not usually 
challenging and profitable. However, entrepreneurs should not take gambles. 

2.3.5. Sound relationships 






Entrepreneurs make an effort to cultivate good relationships with people. This is part of 
networking. They develop good working relations with their staff, clients, suppliers and other 
entrepreneurs. Success is difficult to achieve in isolation. This networking is critical to the 
success of the entrepreneur’s business venture. 

2.3.6. Creativity 






Creativity refers to the entrepreneur’s imagination, his ability to think originally or differently. An 
example would include the recently designed sports shoe washing and drying machine that can 
wash sports shoes and dry them in ten minutes. This is a good example of creativity. 

2.3.7. Positive attitude 

Entrepreneurs remain positive despite setbacks and failure. They sometimes get discouraged 
when situations are not favourable, but they accept this and still remain positive. Difficulties are 
usually encountered with periods of stress. Whilst rewards do come eventually, not everyone 
should become an entrepreneur. 

2.4. Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs 




Rwigema and Vorster (2004:60) outline the characteristics successful entrepreneurs are broadly 
thought to exhibit: 

 

. Commitment, self-reliance and tenacity 
. A need to achieve 
. Opportunity drive 
. Initiative 
. Responsibility 



 

. Problem-solving abilities 
. Team building abilities 
. Internal locus of control 
. High ambiguity tolerance 
. Integrity and consistency 
. Creativity and innovation 


 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

Read the article below and justify why the amount of people joining the road to entrepreneurship 
is climbing and indicate their survival techniques. 

Lessons on Entrepreneurship: What it Takes to Survive & Thrive in This Fast Paced 
Hyper Connected World: 06/13/2016 

The amount of people joining the road to entrepreneurship is climbing - according to Business 
News Daily; “the number of Americans involved in early-stage entrepreneurial activity is the 
highest it has been since The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) began back in 1999.” 
Also according to site, research has found: 13% of Americans are involved in entrepreneurial 
activity. 

Kara Miller, host of WGBH radio’s Innovation Hub credits two main reasons why young adults in 
particular are becoming entrepreneurs: there’s the fame that follows the founder of the next big 
thing and the sheer necessity of finding work in a stagnant economy. Approximately 543,000 
new businesses get started each month, according to Forbes. Over the course of 10 years, 96% 
of businesses fail (Inc.). 

What does it take to make it as an entrepreneur in this era and why are so many 
businesses failing? George Otte, Miami-based entrepreneur and technology expert, shared 
his insight. At the beginning of the interview Otte recalled the first time he felt ‘entrepreneurial.’ “I 
was just seven at the time. I put a sign in the front yard and sold mangos to neighbors and 
passing cars. I’ll never forget how good it felt when I had a cup full of quarters by sunset.” 


George Otte then moved onto starting a tutoring business as a teen prior. Following, he started 
a highly successful computer repair and support service. At age 21, he ran it while enrolled in 
college full time, building a network of more than 100 clients in less than two years. Today, Otte 
serves as the founder and president of the Miami-based Otte Polo Group, a conglomerate of 
businesses that serve customers nationwide and operate in a wide-range of industries including: 
IT support and computer repair, call center and answering services, fulfillment and direct mail, 
and real estate and property management. The Otte Polo Group’s subsidiaries include: Florida-
based Geeks on Site, Responsive Call Center, Phase V Fulfillment, and Otte Real Estate. While 
George attends to this diverse portfolio of companies, he continues to serve as a resource for 
technology related issues. Throughout the years, he has been acknowledged by Entrepreneur, 
NBC, PC Mag, and others, including Mashable in a feature on cyber safety. 
Back in 2002, it wasn’t everyday people in their early 20s who were starting businesses. 

What do you think you knew that they didn’t? Otte indicated that he knew that people were 
willing to pay well for a good service. He was in tech support but it could have been any 
industry. He also knew one could easily incorporate a company in one day and get started - so 
he did. 

Can you recall an ‘aha’ moment you had when first starting any of your businesses? 

My first “aha” was when I was starting Geeks On Site. I realized businesses and individuals 
were willing to pay good money for reliable tech support. I immediately knew that I could hire 
and manage techs to perform this work and profit from it. 

Why do you think businesses fail? 

There are many reasons - sometimes one, sometimes a combination of a few such as poor 
customer service, mismanagement of resources (employees and capital), or economic 
downturns. 

What does it take to make it as an entrepreneur in this era? 

Innovation, adaptability, and having the right pricing strategy are key. Thanks to the Internet, 
consumers are more savvy now than ever before. They are glued to their smartphones and 
want what they want when they want it. If a webpage loads too slowly or a company rep fails to 
respond to an inquiry on social media within 24 hours, that sale could be as good as dead. 
There are some companies out there that have been doing the same old thing for the past ten 
years and then they wonder why their revenue is spiraling downward. Become an expert in your 
industry and get to know your customers and prospects like the back of your hand. 


 

Show them the value of your products and services and deliver it on the channels they 
communicate on in a language they understand. Also be sure to price what you’re selling 
accordingly. If you go too low or too high you could run your company into the ground. Some 
companies offer hefty discounts to bring customers in the door, despite in doing so, they 
decrease their margins. This only goes so far. If what you’re selling is innovative enough, people 
will be more than happy to pay full price. 

What can consumers do to keep up with the fast paced, hyper connected world we live 
in? 

Use a customer relationship management tool (CRM) - it has been key for my businesses. Use 
it to track communications and follow through on requests. I’m also a big fan of surveys. 
Surveying your customers can quickly show you patterns of strengths and weaknesses in your 
operation. If being an entrepreneur was easy, everyone would become one. 

 What can you tell others to do when challenges in business come up? 

Learn something new and lean on other successful business owners for support. It’s important 
to have a circle of like-minded people to lean on. 

What’s something(s) most people don’t know about being an entrepreneur but need to in 
order to survive and thrive? 

Don’t give up. I’ve seen a lot of people start businesses but not focus or commit and then they 
give up. Through the challenges, I wake up every day extremely grateful for how my business 
career has turned out. 

What four things can aspiring entrepreneurs start doing right away to hit the ground 
running with their business in order to make it successful? 

1. Have complete focus and dedication. 
2. Regularly review key areas such as operations, sales/marketing, finance, etc. 
3. Keep a close eye on the customer experience. 
4. Constantly think of ways to grow revenue while keeping costs in check. 

(www.huffingtonpost.com) 

 

 


 

2.5. Dominant themes of entrepreneurial success 




Steyn (in Kroon, 1998:4) contends that consensus exists regarding six dominant themes of 
entrepreneurial success. Steyn refers to the following as primary characteristics for 
entrepreneurial success: 

. Commitment and determination 


Commitment to the opportunity implies sacrifices as far as quality of life, lifestyle and family life 
are concerned. Determination implies succeeding in spite of set-backs 

. Leadership 


This implies that entrepreneurs are visionaries as well as executors of plans. Entrepreneurial 
leadership is dependent on an internal locus of control innate to entrepreneurs and their 
accompanying ability of self-motivation. 

. Opportunity orientation 


Entrepreneurs examine and screen ideas to identify opportunities and pursue feasible 
opportunities relentlessly 

. Tolerance of risk, ambiguity and uncertainty 


Entrepreneurs take calculated risks and expose themselves to financial and personal risks. 
They can also tolerate conflict and uncertainty. 

. Creativity, self-confidence and adaptability 


Successful entrepreneurs are restless initiators who are dissatisfied with the status quo. 

. Motivation to excel 


Successful entrepreneurs are driven by their own need to attain self-defined goals. 

 

2.6. Secondary characteristics for entrepreneurial success 




Steyn (in Kroon, 1998:6) also outlines secondary characteristics for entrepreneurial success, 
maintaining that they “facilitate the road to entrepreneurial success”: 

. Energy, health and emotional stability 
. Creativity and inventiveness 
. Intelligence 
. Ability to inspire 
. Values 


 

 

 

 


 

2.7. Myths 




Steyn (in Kroon, 1998:11) points out that researchers find it difficult to understand 
entrepreneurship because it is difficult to generalise. He lists certain myths which arose in the 
course of time and have been proved wrong by reality: 

 

. Entrepreneurs are born, not made 
. Anyone can establish a successful business 
. Entrepreneurs are action-oriented risk takers 
. Entrepreneurs are inventors or innovators 
. Entrepreneurs want everything for themselves 
. Entrepreneurs are academic and social outcasts 
. Entrepreneurs are their own bosses and independent 
. Entrepreneurs experience unbearable tension 
. New businesses fail within five years 
. Capital is the most important prerequisite 
. Business success is instant 
. Too much planning creates problems 


 

Rwigema and Vorster (2004:66) also detail “a plethora of myths and half-truths” about 
entrepreneurs: 

. Entrepreneurs are born, not made 
. Entrepreneurs are doers, not thinkers 
. Entrepreneurs are inventors 
. Entrepreneurs are social misfits 
. Money is the decisive resource 
. Entrepreneurs depend on luck 
. Entrepreneurs are gamblers 
. Entrepreneurs seek success but are prone to failure 


 

2.8. Key action roles associated with entrepreneurs 




Bolton and Thompson (2000: 21) examine ten key action roles associated with entrepreneurs 
and entrepreneurship, “regardless of the context”, entrepreneurs: 


are creative and innovative 

are individuals who make a significant difference 

put the customer first 

are determined in the face of adversity 

manage risk and create capital 

spot and expolit opportunities 

find the resources required to exploit opportunities 

are good networkers 

 

Table 2.8.1 Key action roles associated with entrepreneurs 

 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

As entrepreneurs the challenge is to manage as well as lead. Read the article below and debate 
the contentious issue of management versus leadership: what’s more important? 

13 Jun 2016: The future of most organisations relies on finding a balance between two 
vital roles, management and leadership writes Nicholas Bradbury of the NHS Leadership 
Academy 

It’s not unusual to hear people talking about the importance of having both great managers and 
leaders inside an organisation. Indeed, Nigel Edwards from the Nuffield Trust published a very 
interesting blog recently on the subject, which emphasised that, although leadership is 
important, our obsession with it has obscured the importance of effective management and 
administration. But when it comes to defining what each role entails, the lines become a little 
blurred. 

Managers must know their subject. So, for example, if you’re clinical lead for a hospital and 
you’re also a manager, you need to know what you’re talking about – you need clinical expertise 
in your given area. 


Being a leader is all about interpersonal skills; they show you to be open-hearted, generous, 
warm and caring. If you can do that, even if you’re the toughest of managers, known for taking a 
firm line, you can still be respected, admired and appreciated. A great leader is a developed and 
evolved human being with empathy, who wants to empower their team and delegate to grow 
new leaders. Go to any organisation and listen to people talking about their manager and you 
soon understand what matters to them. Does their manager have genuine leadership skills and 
authenticity as a human being? Do they welcome them and treat them as a person and not just 
a role? Do they look them in the eye and listen to them? You can be a fantastically capable 
manager, but, if you’re not also a wonderful leader, you’re quickly going to alienate everyone in 
your team and beyond. 

Leadership academies recognises that as soon as you’re in a formal ‘leadership’ role you need 
management skills as well. So what’s stopping those in charge from combining the two 
elements in everyday roles? 

Small-picture thinking 

First, we’re still prioritising our own organisation rather than the system as a whole. This is 
short-sighted and not good for patients, staff or citizens. 

Lack of ownership 

It’s ok to admit what we don’t know but we feel frightened that ‘coming clean’ will mean we won’t 
be respected. It’s actually the opposite. It’s important that we move towards a culture of 
acceptance, not fear. 

Red tape 

Regulators are currently a barrier to successful system leadership in the many organisations, as 
research from The King’s Fund recently revealed. Rather than encouraging each organisation to 
just act independently and compete on its own terms, we need to encourage a whole-system 
approach with every Trust working towards the same end-goal. 

Lack of trust 

Leadership works on the fundamental assumption that systems can only move forward where 
there is complete trust. You can’t have system collaboration without everyone coming together 
and believing and trusting in the same end-goal. It’s about overcoming rivalries and fear of 
giving up power by sharing. (www.cipd.co.uk/pm/peoplemanagement) 


http://gabriellemaston.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Motivation1.jpg
http://images.huffingtonpost.com/2013-04-02-Maslows_Hierarchy_of_Needs.svg3.png 


2.9. Organisational Management and Performance 




In order to understand organisational management and performance it is necessary to draw 
upon current psychological, management, economic, and entrepreneurship theory. Though 
there is considerable controversy in the field of 
psychology concerning the ability of personality 
traits to explain behavior, it is accepted by many 
that such traits do exist, that they are stable over 
time. 

2.9.1. Personality Traits 






 Hollenbeck and Whitener (1988) noted that one of 
the problems in using personality traits to explain 
job performance was that such traits are mediated 
by motivation and moderated by abilities in their underlying connection to performance. Thus, 
personality traits are somewhat removed from performance in the fundamental chain of events. 
When studying the entrepreneur, it is necessary to include the mediating role of motivation and 
the moderating role of entrepreneurial management abilities. 

2.9.2. Psychology 






In studying the emerging model of “entrepreneurial characteristics” it is incumbent to draw upon 
literature from the field of psychology. It is further important to consider a psychology-based 
model of the “characteristics” as the 

relationship between entrepreneurial 

 characteristics and organisational 

management is more 
comprehensive and realistic than 
generally understood. 

 

 

 

 

Illustration 2.9.2. Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory 

 




2.9.3. Strategic management 






Strategic management, entrepreneurship and economics indicate a connection between 
entrepreneurial characteristics and organisational development. Strategy and industry structure 
are “context” variables that interdependently interact with entrepreneurial behaviors to influence 
growth. Managers could be matched to situations which in turn implies that the effects of 
entrepreneurial behaviors on organisational management and performance are contingent upon 
strategy and industry structure. Thus, strategy and industry structure, though ultimately 
determined by entrepreneurial behavior, are themselves important inputs to the behavioral 
context of entrepreneurship. Decision-making, skills, aptitudes, and training are components 
that assist in refining the understanding of the role of motivation within the ambit of the 
“entrepreneurial characteristics”. The “entrepreneur” is the focus as the factors of motivation, 
ability, skill, aptitude and training are elements in modeling or creating entrepreneurial behavior 
along with the need for strategy and industry structure contexts. The entrepreneur must be at 
the central position of entrepreneurship, as both theory and practitioners concur that’s where 
he/she belongs. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/088390269390032Z) 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 2.1 

Read the article (http://www.fin24.com/Entrepreneurs/My-Business/Dbn-entrepreneurs-share-
their-road-map-to-success-20151010) and answer the questions that follow. 

Dbn entrepreneurs share their road map to success 

Oct 10 2015 08:00 

Liziwe Ndalana 

Majozi Bros co-owners Simphiwe Majozi and Sihle Ndlela. 

Cape Town - Two young Durban entrepreneurs, who "build dreams instead of houses", have 
been inundated with calls from "aspiring construction entrepreneurs seeking advice and 
mentorship" after they shared their success story with Fin24. With an annual turnover of R5m 
in their last financial year after just five years in business and a firm intention to go national and 
up against the likes of Basil Read, Grinaker and JT Ross, 26-year-olds Simphiwe Majozi 
and Sihle Ndlela are a force to be reckoned with. Ndlela said in an update to Fin24 the 
response has been overwhelming. Their personal account of how they met and grew Majozi 
Bros to employ 52 people currently also inspired us to find out more. 

 

Fin24 caught up with Ndlela: How did you grow your business - in terms of funding to 
expand the business? 

We formed a couple of informal businesses which generated a passive income for us. This 
income allowed us not to take salaries from the construction business. We were able to invest 
every cent we made back into the business. We invested heavily into marketing because 
marketing initiates and drives sales and converted sales equal profit. 

 

 

 


 

 When we made profit on various projects, we split it into different funds: 

A contingency fund - money put aside for unforeseen situations that may even be potentially 
threatening to our business; 

An education fund - for investing in our training and development as well as key staff members 
who show potential; 

 

An investment fund - for the specific purpose to invest in property so that we can create a 
continuous flow of work for our employees and business while growing our cash reserves in the 
long term; and finally 

 

An assets fund - which we used to buy assets that would improve our construction processes 
and increase our capacity to get the job done. 

It was this approach that enabled us to grow our business and carve a footprint in the market. 

 

2. What were your biggest challenges? 
One of the problems we faced was our age; people couldn't believe that being as young as we 
were that we could deliver on what we promised. To overcome that obstacle, we studied a lot of 
short building courses and we positioned ourselves in the market as experts. Unlike most 
building contractors in the market we didn't sell a price tag to our clients but rather we educated 
our potential customers as much as we possibly can so that they could make informed 
decisions. We got written referrals from our happy clients and we insisted that our potential 
clients visit our current and completed projects so they can judge our capabilities first hand. We 
also developed a culture of under-promising but over-delivering. When we got into the industry, 
the building industry and black building contractors in general had a very bad reputation, they 
were known for very poor workmanship and extremely high prices. We decided to differentiate 
ourselves by establishing a strong brand in the market, one that was associated with quality 
workmanship. We joined quality assurance organisations such as NHBRC (National Home 
Builders Registration Council) and CIDB (Construction Industry Development Board). We made 
sure that our tradesmen were highly skilled artisans and that our foremen experienced in 
construction process and personnel management. 


 

 


 

 3. How important is marketing for a business? 

We invested heavily into branding and marketing - all our staff, including ourselves and our 
foremen wear branded uniforms. We made sure that our vehicles are branded and that all of our 
sites have branded sign boards with our details on it. We marketed ourselves extensively on the 
internet and also in newspapers and billboards. The most important thing in construction is to 
understand pricing and how to cut and save costs. In the early days we didn't really understand 
how the pricing model worked - on many occasions we would price ourselves out of business. 
We would get jobs based on our low price, but the jobs were not profitable. We had a big order 
book but no money. 

We decided to get help from experts. We contracted the services of an accountant to help us 
manage and monitor costs and help us system up with financial controls. We also got our 
accountant to sit us down once a week and educate us about different aspects of financial 
management. We approached various experienced quantity surveyors and asked them to teach 
us how to effectively calculate quantities and costs. We also invested into costing software. In 
the early days when we didn't have vehicles, we could get material to site on time, but not our 
workers and that resulted in a number of inefficiencies. This ultimately comprised our bottom 
line, because we weren't able to finish projects on time due to delays. 

Eventually we managed to buy a vehicle which lead to more vehicles and today we have a fleet 
of four vans. You can have the best product/service on the market but it won't sell unless your 
customers know about it. And how you let you customers know that you exist is through 
marketing. When we started we had no marketing budget at all, we had to do with what little we 
had and be creative about it. We posted free ads on different online platforms; we relied heavily 
on referrals so we had to produce top class workmanship for our existing clients to become 
somewhat of a sales team. We told everyone who was willing to listen about our business and 
what sets us apart from other businesses. 

2. What sacrifices did you have to make as individuals to make your business a 
success? 


 

We lost our social life and some friends as we both are workaholics. We are also both 
passionate to the extreme about our business and are always using whatever spare time we 
can get to strategise on the direction our business should take. Simphiwe sacrificed the comfort 
of his stable job and I sacrificed an opportunity to get my university degree. 


 

 We have sacrificed quality time with family. At times we have sacrificed our money to the last 
cents to make our business work. Sometimes we were caught in situations where we l had to 
force breakthroughs because we literally had nothing to lose. 

3. What did you learn the hard way as an entrepreneur? 


Between the two of us we have over eight failed business ventures. The hardest lesson we had 
to learn as entrepreneurs was to be able to accept failure what it really is. Failing doesn't make 
someone a failure, failure is an opportunity, an opportunity to start again but more intelligently, 
there's more to learn from failure then there is to learn from success. We are a product of the 
lessons we learnt from our failure hence we always make sure to turn our failure into positives 
no matter how severe they might seem at the time. 

6. How helpful is your partnership for your business? 

Being in this partnership is the best thing either of us could have done. No one in business has 
all the required skill sets to start and run a successful business. Simphiwe and I have strengths 
and weaknesses, my weaknesses are his strengths and his weaknesses are my strengths 
therefore we are able to bridge each other’s weaknesses. Our partnership helps us come up 
with innovative ways of solving problems that we wouldn't have been able to come up with if we 
were individuals and it has helped us to bounce ideas off each other and give each other 
objective and unbiased feedback. Our partnership is not perfect, we have our fair share of 
problems but our common vision and love for business is what keeps us together and makes us 
lethal as a pair. 

7. How important is cash flow in your type of business? Do clients always pay on time, if 
not, how do you manage these to ensure the business does not suffer? Also, how do you 
pay your staff during such instances? 

 

We learnt the hard way that cash is king. Most of our ventures failed due to a poor cash flow 
management. Inflows of cash need to exceed outflows, so we made a policy of getting 
payments prior a project and created payment schedules that ensure we are always ahead with 
payments verses the work. At first we would have staff that would require money at anytime, 
any day and made up things such as transport money etc. We realised how this was messing 
up the cash flow, so we created payments for every second week of the month. 

 


 

8. How important is a cash reserve fund/emergency fund for a business day? Does your 
business have one? 

A cash reserve fund is paramount for any business especially in an industry as volatile as ours. 
Every business goes through a cycle of ups and downs. We prepare for the downside by saving 
up reserves during the upward cycles and investing into property development when there is a 
slowdown. For instance, the industry as a whole is experiencing a downward cycle, but we have 
managed to buy some cheap pieces of land where we will create our own opportunities and 
build our own houses to sell. By doing this we would also be able to keep some of our staff 
employed and grow our reserves during the low cycles of business. We are firm believers in the 
notion that it is not about how much money you make, but it’s how you use it. 

In conclusion 

 

 One of the ways we try to insure quality and that we grow as business and as entrepreneurs is 
to approach established construction companies. We don't ask them for BEE deals or handouts 
but we ask them to visit our sites and premises and to critique our construction processes and 
business model and suggest ways we can improve. The response has been phenomenal. 
Here's what some of them have had to say about us: 

 

"I've met hundreds of guys since 1994 starting out like yourselves, I don't know what it is but 
there is just something different about you guys. I've got a good feeling about you" Graeme 
Davis, CEO of G2 Construction, R250m company. “You guys are the future of this industry, and 
that makes me confident about the future of this country" Rodney van der Walt, CEO of GCP, 
R350m company."I like you guys, I really like you guys, the passion you've shown me today will 
make you unstoppable" Craig Jessop, Director of WBHO, R14bn company."You guys will build 
an Empire, I honestly don't see anything stopping you" Andre du Plessis, Director of Liviero, 
R15bn."I don't have to see any of your sites but I know you guys can deliver, I've been in the 
game for 50 years, and when you've been in the game for as long as I have you get a feel for 
these things" Pieter Voogt, owner of Voogt, R700m company. 

* Ndlela answered all the questions via email. 

 

 

 

 

 


 

QUESTIONS 

2.1.1. Identify the various characteristics of an entrepreneur 
2.1.2 Did you identify any popular myths of entrepreneurship in the case study? Motivate your 
answer by making reference to the case study? 
2.1.2. Evaluate the personal factors that you believe have impacted upon the entrepreneurial 
direction taken by the Brothers. 
2.1.3. Identify and discuss the skills which the Brothers have that have enhanced their 
entrepreneurial performance. 
2.1.4. Evaluate the role of entrepreneurial characteristics in organisation management and 
performance as experienced by the Brothers. 
2.1.5. With reference to the case study, critically discuss organisational management and 
performance. 






 

ACTIVITY 2.2 

Read the article and answer the questions that follow: 

JUNE 11, 2015 

Starting a new business venture from scratch… 

Starting a new business venture from scratch can sometimes feel like jumping out of an airplane 
and assembling the parachute on the way down. That's because, as is often the case, business 
success happens largely through trial and error. And that's where a road map comes in handy 
… yours should help you so you don’t get stuck. If your path is like most peoples’, here’s how it 
will proceed: 

. You'll start out with a personal road map, and when you find your passion, you'll develop a 
business road map. 
. Your journey will start at point A, but point B will not be linear: There's often no straight line 
between the two. 
. You'll plant seeds to achieve your personal goals and see which ones grow. When you find 
one that does, you'll chart a course to follow that growth. 



. Should that growth become a passion, and a business, you'll then plant more seeds 
(typically, more calculated ones) within your business, to see which ones work. This is the 
start of your business road map. 


Don’t be afraid to aim high. Google wasn’t built in a day, and you won't reach your primary goal 
in a short time, either. In your business, production, marketing, sales and other departments will 
have to establish their responsibilities. Budgets will need to be created and adjusted. Products 
and services will need to be developed. Sales will need to be made, and orders fulfilled. 

All these incremental activities are necessary to reach your goal. You’ll want to focus on the 
pieces of the journey as you build your road map, not just the end goal or the quickest way to 
get from point A to B. Of course, not all incremental steps will go as planned. That won't be the 
end of the world or necessarily a major failure. Instead, the next thing on the horizon will be 
where you can refocus your attention, within the scheme of the larger goal of building and 
running a successful company. Each new incremental goal will become your next mountain to 
climb as you travel the road to your final goal. 

So, start by defining your passions and goals, and you’ll already have the makings of a 
definitive plan. And don’t be afraid to give it 100 percent. Once you have set an intention and a 
goal, don’t just dream about it, attack it. 

(http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/246888) 

 

QUESTIONS 

2.2.1 Evaluate the personal factors that you believe may impact entrepreneurial success. 
2.2.2. Identify and discuss the skills which are necessary to enhance the entrepreneurial 
performance. 
2.2.3. By making reference to the caselet, provide an evaluation on the role of entrepreneurial 
characteristics in organisational management and performance. 






 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ARTICLE 2.3 

Read the article below and critique the statement “Entrepreneurs remain the engine of the 
global economy.” 

President Obama… Entrepreneurship 

While the notion that you must be in Silicon Valley to be a successful startup is thankfully less 
common these days, all eyes were on the region last week, and for a very good reason. U.S. 
President Barack Obama gathered more than 1000 international entrepreneurs and investors at 
Stanford University for a landmark summit that included some of the biggest founder brands in 
the space. 

Hosting the Global Entrepreneurship Summit (GES) in Silicon Valley highlighted America’s 
entrepreneurial spirit and also allowed American investors and entrepreneurs to see the talent, 
solutions and opportunities that exist around the world – and appreciate that good ideas come 
from everywhere. It was also timely to demonstrate how globalized the start and scale world is 
at a time when grassroots political movements are challenging the benefits of globalization at 
home. As President Obama’s administration comes to an end, it is hard to deny that this 
administration has carried entrepreneurship as a flag for American diplomacy, making 
entrepreneurs its best allies in building bridges to other nations. The president sharing the stage 
with the likes of Mark Zuckerberg, founder and CEO of Facebook, at Stanford last week was 
reflective of this mindset. 

The main message to the world has been that entrepreneurship can flourish in any country, and 
that efforts towards that goal would yield results for the collective benefit of all economies. With 
elections on the horizon this November, many thought it would be the White House’s last GES, 
but it was only the last one hosted by the current president. The legacy will continue. President 
Obama announced that GES will take place in India next year (2017). 

Policy Challenges Ahead 

Beyond Zuckerberg, President Obama was joined by a number of well-known founders of other 
companies like Google, Uber and Airbnb. Appropriately for a government convened event the 
president and other moderators like Steve Case, co-founder of AOL and chairman of the Case 
Foundation, asked entrepreneurs directly what policymakers could do to help. 

 


 

 As Case mentioned, while there are comprehensive initiatives working on this like Startup 
Nations, questioning startups about where they needed help in 2016 from government is now 
more commonplace as elected officials work to be relevant to the startup revolution in their 
countries. So what did the entrepreneurs tell the president? 

The most important message in my view came from Zuckerberg, someone from whom I would 
like to have heard more. When the president asked him what he thought was most important for 
governments to do to enable more “Facebook-like success stories,” Zuckerberg was crystal 
clear focusing on the importance of connectivity as a basic service, much like healthcare. 
Making affordable access to basic internet services available to every person is now one of 
today’s driving motivations for this rock star entrepreneur and ambassador for the American 
spirit of entrepreneurship. 

Internet.org by Facebook is now testing initiatives to overcome issues of accessibility and 
affordability in internet access around the world. Its “Connectivity Lab” is working on ways to 
beam the internet to people from the sky via a variety of technologies developed via 
partnerships, including high-altitude, long-endurance aircraft, satellites and lasers. While the 
notion of connectivity as a force for positive change is not new (think GrameenPhone), the 
power of the idea of access to Internet connectivity as a basic service is yet to be fully 
appreciated. 

As Zuckerberg’s team dreams of connecting the world, they invent and deploy new technology 
that can yield entire new products and industries for a variety of purpose. In fact, the team 
behind Internet.org has been reported to say that once the technology is built, a lot of it will be 
open-sourced so that others can commercialize it. Another important implication of this 
endeavor is that it pushes the frontier for groundbreaking policy thinking. 

In the 1990s when South Korea was developing its innovation and entrepreneurship strategy it 
smartly elected to pick just one of hundreds of goals – broadband connectivity for all of its 
citizens. South Korea has benefited from this in so many ways and, as Zuckerberg said, getting 
the remaining 4 billion people on the planet access should be the our primary strategy for 
accelerating global economic growth. 

Beyond internet infrastructure, there were other responses to the president’s question at the 
GES. A common refrain was that while great ideas are born in the most unexpected corners of 
the world, as exemplified by delegate entrepreneurs from across the five continents to the GES, 


access to capital and opportunity are not the same everywhere, even within the United States 
where inter and intra-ecosystem disparities persist. As can be expected at a major celebration 
event for global entrepreneurs, it was also suggested the next administration will be measured 
against progress beyond raising awareness. For example, the battle to close the gender gap in 
entrepreneurship opportunities continues. The GES+ Emerging Youth and Women 
Entrepreneurs organized by the Global Entrepreneurship Network reminded the audience that 
investing in women entrepreneurs not only fuels economic growth, but also drives innovation to 
address the critical challenges communities are facing worldwide. Moreover, we know that when 
women entrepreneurs succeed, they are more likely to move the needle on achieving greater 
gender balance in their ecosystems, as they then become mentors, investors and role models. 

One optimistic message from the Valley last week was the confidence expressed by new firm 
founders that more of the world’s most pressing challenges can be solved by involving 
entrepreneurs in building solutions and strengthening ecosystems in the process. Many ideas 
were aired throughout the GES, including by Dell and the Kauffman Foundation who, with 
support from the U.S. State Department, conducted an interactive policy hackathon that tasked 
teams of entrepreneurs, investors and policy experts to design solutions to pressing global 
policy challenges. The winning team proposed the development of an app that would help 
address current and future refugee crises by providing translation software and bridging the gap 
between employers and high-skilled refugees. The team argued that refugees should be “seen 
for their potential, not as a liability,” and that governments “should be investing money in 
refugees from the beginning, encouraging them to act” in the workforce. 

Another session that engaged entrepreneurs in crafting solutions was the Ecosystem 
Hackathon – brainstorming ways for communities to grow and strengthen their entrepreneurship 
ecosystem. Guided through a hands-on, interactive process by the Kauffman Foundation along 
with 8Works Consulting, participants came up with solutions in four categories – connectivity, 
culture, top-down enabling bottom-up and measurement. 

 The other silver lining is the increased availability of data that can guide smarter policymaking. 
Take the Dell Women Entrepreneur Cities Index (WE Cities), released at the summit, which 
measures a city’s ability to attract and support high-potential women entrepreneurs who want to 
grow their business. When the first rule is to do no harm, we have to provide more reliable data 
to decision makers in government if we are to enable them to help with issues entrepreneurs 
have voiced. 

 


 

The Work Will Continue 

As chair of the Spark coalition and president of the Global Entrepreneurship Network, with 
support from leading partners, including the Kauffman Foundation, I know many remain 
committed to carrying a vision of one global entrepreneurial ecosystem forward, helping ensure 
that leaders from the public sector can join efforts with the private and civil sectors in building 
stronger startup and scale up communities. For example: 

• As announced at the GES in Stanford last week, three partner organizations – GEN, 
UNCTAD and the U.S. State Department – the public-private partnership that is making it easier 
for startups to register their new businesses all over the world, the Global Enterprise 
Registration portal, will be expanded. Transparency is a powerful tool in, if necessary, shaming 
governments to leave what are often oceans of red tape in the history books and adopt on 
demand conveniences for our new makers and doers of things. 

• The Global Business Angels Network, a growing network of early stage investors looking 
to expand early stage investment beyond developed economy markets are amplifying the angel 
"voice" in policymaking discussions and ensuring there are new more nimble models being 
adopted to respond to the call for greater access to capital in underdeveloped economies. 

• The network of startup policy advisors mentioned by Steve Case who founded Startup 
America on which Startup Nations was modeled, is building a compendium of policy levers 
called the Startup Nations Atlas of Policies (SNAP) and forming working groups on innovative 
policy levers, such as the new wave of startup visa schemes. 

Entrepreneurs remain the engine of the global economy. As fears of declining international 
collaboration crystalize in political developments like the recent Brexit vote, the perspective of a 
world of porous borders is even more important than ever. A presidential impeachment in a 
large economy like Brazil, the unusual presidential elections in the United States, Brexit and the 
increasing suspicion of refugees and immigrants in all parts of the world are indeed alarming. To 
entrepreneurs, however, they are nothing short of opportunities. 

When someone creates uncertainty and changes the rules, all bets are off and entrepreneurs 
go to work. They see monoliths to challenge and new opportunities for new business models. 
Entrepreneurs’ voices therefore will carry more weight as political battles lay ahead for our 
nations. 


 

President Obama should be credited for his extraordinary contribution over the past few years to 
empowering and preparing those voices to be constructive innovators in the tumultuous times 
ahead. Movements such as Global Entrepreneurship Week, where people in 160+ countries 
celebrate their entrepreneurs each November on a global stage, and events like the one we 
saw last week at Stanford, will be vital to empowering this positive generation that has more 
answers and fewer complaints than the public at large. 

I know for my part, I will put more vigor into enabling the next major global gathering of 
entrepreneurial minds in March 2017 at the Global Entrepreneurship Congress in 
Johannesburg, South Africa. Come and help us support those taking a global view to improving 
the lives of their fellow citizens. (http://www.kauffman.org/blogs/policy-dialogue/2016/) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


CHAPTER 3: 
INTEGRATION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL AND BUSINESS 
MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 

 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of entrepreneurial and business management processes. 
The learner must also be able to establish how the integration of entrepreneurial and business 
management processes enhances the performance of the organisation. These outcomes will be 
achieved through the learner’s mastery of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will 
be able to: 

1. Explain the concept of entrepreneurial processes. 
2. Identify and discuss business management and business management processes. 
3. Define and critically discuss organisational performance. 
4. Establish how the integration of entrepreneurial and business management processes 






 enhances organisational performance. 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

Textbooks: 

 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapter Three 

Venter, Urban and Rwigema (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C, (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 

 

 

 

 


http://cdn.entrepreneurshipinabox.com/wp-content/uploads/Decision-Making-Process.png
https://static.cengagelearning.com.au/HEDL9780170214988.jpg 


3.1. INTRODUCTION 

According to Rwigema and Venter (2004:25), the elements of entrepreneurship are: 

. an opportunity focus 
. a business plan 
. an appropriate structure and a motivated 
team, 
. a founder or lead entrepreneur 


 

3.2. ENTREPRENEURIAL PROCESS 

The entrepreneurial process involves founding (or reinventing) a business venture and 
growing it into a thriving, agile enterprise. Specific steps include: 

. identifying, measuring and refining an opportunity from multiple ideas 
. formulating a business plan 
. marshalling the resources 
. organising and mobilising the entrepreneurial team 
. overseeing new venture creation and growth 


Human (Kroon, 1998:85) examines the entrepreneurial process in terms of a framework based 
on the “driving forces of entrepreneurship.” The three driving forces are the entrepreneur, the 
opportunity and the resources. This ultimately involves the decision making processes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 3.2.1 The Decision Making Process 

 


 

The entrepreneurial process is illustrated in the following diagram, adapted from Timmons 
(1994:17): 

 

 Social factors / Cultural factors 

 

Fit versus gaps 

 

OPPORTUNITY 

 

ENTREPRENEUR 

RESOURCES 

 Information Unpredictabilities 

 

Moving Targets Competition Contradictions 

 

Turbulence 

Political conditions 

 

 

Financial market 

 

Technological changes 

 

Imperfect markets 

 

Economic conditions 

 

Risk and uncertainty 

 

 Figure 3.2.2 The Entrepreneurial Process 

The degree of fit between the driving forces and the timing of the venture are two important 
elements of the process. Fit refers to the degree to which the three driving forces are 
compatible. Opportunities in business are always related to timing so that timing is crucial in any 
entrepreneurial activity. Of the three forces, the entrepreneur is the most critical factor; the 
characteristics of entrepreneurs have been outlined in the previous chapters. The opportunity or 
the market potential is the next extremely important factor. A good opportunity is attractive, 
sustainable, timely, and anchored in a product or service that adds value to the customer 

The third driving force in the entrepreneurial process is identifying, obtaining and managing the 
resources necessary to utilise the opportunity. The entrepreneur uses a variety of resources 
such as capital, human resources, equipment and knowledge. The emphasis is on control over 
resources rather than the ownership thereof. (Human, Kroon 1998:28) 

 

 


https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/vEauPsS9KF6kszpRiC5lrKER_ywLEaS_HO1z1-dht3yUPcKm_i34ft4FGWfitlck0Ojbi1JBvG6RSuJwAIiWpYjPVpwjopKnHa2a9SElCoWfJqHjr64RVN4s48uhySeVUQ 


Kaplan (2004:7) describes the five-stage entrepreneurial process as follows: 

Stage 1: Conducting opportunity analysis – the opportunity is identified and a vision is 
created. 

Stage 2: Developing the plan and setting up the company – strategies are documented and 
converted to a business plan. 

Stage 3: Acquiring financial partners/sources of funding – acquiring financial investors and 
partners 

Stage 4: Determining the resources required and implementing the plan 

Stage 5: Scaling and harvesting the venture 

 

 
The Entrepreneur’s Journey (www.google.co.za) 

 


 

Wickham’s (2001:37) approach to the entrepreneurial process is based on four interacting 
contingencies. The entrepreneur is responsible for bringing these together to create new value. 
A contingency is defined as something which must be present in the process but can make its 
appearance in a variety of ways. The four contingencies in the entrepreneurial process are the 
entrepreneur, a market opportunity, a business organisation and resources to be invested. This 
is illustrated in the following diagram. 

 

 

Organisation 

 Opportunity 

 The 

entrepreneur 

Resources 

 Identification 

 Attraction 

 and 

 management 

Leadership 
and 

direction 

 Diagram 3.2.1 Wickham’ s 4 Contingencies 

The entrepreneurial process is dynamic. Success comes from the four contingencies coming 
together and supporting each other over time. The entrepreneur lies at the heart of the 
entrepreneurial process. An opportunity is the gap left in a market by those who currently serve 
it. It represents the potential to serve customers better than they are being served at present. 

The entrepreneur scans the business landscape for unexploited opportunities or possibilities 
that something can be done both differently from the way it is currently being done, and better 
than it is at the moment. The improvement is the innovation the entrepreneur presents to the 
market. In order to supply the innovation to the market, the activities of a number of people must 


The fit and balance 
between and among 
the three driving 
forces is very 
important 

An entrepreneurial 
team is a critical 
ingredient for 
success. 

An entrepreneurial 
team is a critical 
ingredient for 
success. 

The process is 
opportunity driven 
and the timing of the 
entrepreneurial 
process is equally 
important. 

be coordinated. This is the function of the organisation. Entrepreneurial organisations are 
characterised by strong, often charismatic leadership. 

The final contingency in the entrepreneurial process is resources. This includes money 
invested, the people who contribute efforts, knowledge and skills, physical assets (equipment 
and machinery) and intangible assets (brand names, company reputation and customer 
goodwill). Timmons and Spinelli (2207:89) depict the entrepreneurial process in terms of the 
Timmons Model, which has three key elements: 

 

 Communication 

Opportunity 

Resources 

Team 

Business Plan 

 

 Fits and gaps 

Ambiguity 

 

 

Creativity 

Uncertainty 

Capital market context 

Exogenous 
forces 

 

Leadership 

 The Entrepreneurial Process (Timmons And Spinelli.2207:89) 

Timmons et al (2007:89) points to the following with regards to the entrepreneurial process 

 

 Diagram 3.2.2. The entrepreneurial process (Timmons and Spinelli (2007:89) 

 


http://image.slidesharecdn.com/winningteamforyoungenterprise-100313152001-phpapp01/95/creating-a-winning-enterprise-your-place-in-the-entrepreneurial-process-8-728.jpg?cb=1268517373 


 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

Consider the following illustration and argue the contention that creativity and innovation 
is more critical to a firm’s success as compare to recognition of value. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://thebizmanagementguide.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/what-is-management.png
http://is4profit.com/img/business-advice/business-strategy/management-coaching.jpg 


3.3. Management 




The following excerpts provide an insight into management. 

 

 

 
(www.google.co.za) 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Contemporary organisation are continually needing to grapple with new challenges. 
Management and leading styles need to adapt to the changing labour force, the market 
complexities and dynamic micro- environmental factors. 

 The word cloud below focuses on key concepts relating to management. 

 

 
(www.google.co.za) 

 

 


http://www.managementstudyguide.com/images/management_functions.jpg
C:\Users\Nadine\Pictures\slide_10.jpg 


The illustration below indicates the key managerial components of business management 

 

 Diagram 3.3.1 Business Management 

3.4. Business Processes 




Deming (1950) recommended that business processes be placed in a continuous feedback loop 
so that managers can identify and change the parts of the process that need improvements. As 
a teacher, Deming created a (rather oversimplified) diagram to illustrate this continuous 
process, commonly known as the PDCA cycle for Plan, Do, Check, Act: 

. PLAN: Design or revise business process components to improve results 
. DO: Implement the plan and measure its performance 
. CHECK: Assess the measurements and report the results to decision makers 
. ACT: Decide on changes needed to improve the process 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 (Source: Heizer & Render (2014:248) 

 

 


 

3.5. Business Management Skills 




To run a successful business entrepreneurs need a diverse range of business management 
skills. When a business is started it is likely that the following responsibilities will result: 

. sales and marketing; 
. accounts; 
. human resources; and 
. information technology (IT). 


It is a good idea to plan ahead of time how each area will be managed as this may include 
delegating various functions to a business partner, undertaking additional training or contracting 
a specialist advisor such as a bookkeeper, graphic designer or merchandiser. 

3.6. Key Responsibilities of Management 




It is important to remember that managers need to understand, manage and take responsibility 
for every aspect of the business. What is significant is that managers do not have to do 
everything themselves. Some of the key areas are outlined below. 

3.6.1. Marketing, sales and promotion 






Marketing is more than just selling and promoting a business. It's about identifying customers 
and working out how to get them to purchase your product or service. 

3.6.2. Human resources 






Human resources is about managing and looking after staff. If an existing business is taken over 
or a franchise is purchased, it may emerge that employees are inherited and need to be 
managed before the business can be started. 

3.6.3. Understanding business financials 

The primary objective of any business is to make a profit. Good financial management is 
essential to ensure business goals are achieved. The first step involves understanding financial 
statements which is crucial to running a successful business. 

3.6.4. Communication and negotiation skills 

Business is all about people regardless of the industry or the product or service that is being 


 

offered. On a daily basis a range of people including customers, suppliers, employees and 
business associates will be encountered. Developing communication and negotiation skills will 
be invaluable in a range of situations from negotiating a supplier contract to dealing with a 
difficult customer. 

3.6.5. Knowledge of business legal issues 

Starting a business can be full of legal potholes for the unwary, whether its industry regulation, 
tax requirements, industrial relations, business structures, negotiating a commercial tenancy 
lease or contracts with suppliers. There are many legal issues to be aware of, so before 
commencing with a business, it is a good idea to engage a lawyer to advise in these areas. 

3.6.6. Logistics 






Logistics is about managing the procurement, supply and maintenance of products and 
operational goods. One of the major concerns for a business owner is stock control and there 
are many different approaches and programs to stock management. Before a business is 
started, one should think about how you’ll ensure you have the right amount of stock at the right 
place and at the right time. Efficiently managing stock is important and will ensure your capital 
isn’t tied up, and protects production if problems arise in the supply chain. 

3.7. Organisational Performance 




Organisational performance management is the process of making sure that your company 
resources are being properly used in pursuit of company goals. The concept of performance 
management is commonly applied to employee development. The managerial and executive 
staff also needs to develop a monitoring system that charts the progress of the company and 
determine when changes in policy or procedure need to be made. 

 

When seeking to improve the performance of an organisation, it is very helpful to regularly 
conduct assessments of the current performance of the organisation. Assessments might be 
planned, systematic and explicit or unplanned and implicit. Well-done assessments typically use 
tools, such as comprehensive questionnaires, SWOT analyses, diagnostic models etc, along 
with comparison of results to various "best practices" or industry standards. 

 

 

 

 


http://pestleanalysis.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/SWOT-Analysis-examples.png 


 

 

 (www.google.co.za) 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

What makes SWOT particularly powerful is that, with a little thought, it can help you uncover 
opportunities that you are well-placed to exploit. And by understanding the weaknesses of your 
business, you can manage and eliminate threats that would otherwise catch you unawares 
More than this, by looking at yourself and your competitors using the SWOT framework, you can 
start to craft a strategy that helps you distinguish yourself from your competitors, so that you can 
compete successfully in your market. 

Critically analyse why this is important to entrepreneurs. 

 

 


 

3.8. Business Plans 




A business plan is a formal statement of business goals, reasons they are attainable, 
and plans for reaching them. It may also contain background information about the organisation 
or team attempting to reach those goals. (www.google.co.za) A business plan is a written 
description of your business's future, a document that tells what you plan to do and how you 
plan to do it. If you jot down a paragraph on the back of an envelope describing your business 
strategy, you've written a plan, or at least the germ of a plan. Business plans are inherently 
strategic. You start here, today, with certain resources and abilities. You want to get to a there, 
a point in the future (usually three to five years out) at which time your business will have a 
different set of resources and abilities as well as greater profitability and increased assets. Your 
plan shows how you will get from here to there. According to 
www.entrepreneur.com/article/247574, the following questions must be answered when working 
on business plans. 

Before Writing Your Plan 

. How Long Should Your Plan Be? 
. When Should You Write It? 
. Who Needs A Business Plan? 
. Why Should You Write A Business Plan? 
. Determine Your Goals and Objectives 
. Outline Your Financing Needs 
. Plan What You'll Do With Your Plan 
. Don't Forget About Marketing 


Writing Your Business Plan 

. How To Write A Business Plan 
. The Ingredients of a Marketing Plan 
. Updating Your Business Plan 
. Enhancing Your Business Plan 



 

Business Plan Tools 

. Business Plan Software 
. Books and How-to Manuals 
. Business Plan Templates 
. Sample Business Plans 


There are good as well as bad business plans. Whether a plan is good or bad depends on how 
well the business plan has been written. A business plan is a written summary of an 
entrepreneur's proposed business venture, its operational and financial details, its marketing 
opportunities and strategy and its managers’ skills and abilities. It acts as a roadmap of the 
business and an insurance against launching a business destined to fail or mismanaging a 
potentially successful company. 

 

The aim of the business plan is to communicate to the stakeholders of the business (a 
stakeholder is someone with an interest in the business). It communicates to investors, 
employees, suppliers, financiers and other groups with an interest in the business. But why 
communicate through a business plan? This is necessary in order to sell the idea that the 
business venture will succeed and to persuade people to invest in the enterprise. The business 
plan aims to convince readers that a sustainable demand for a product/service exists, that the 
risk have been identified but are manageable, that the enterprise is profitable and that the 
entrepreneurial team is experienced. 

 

Broadly, a business plan serves two essential functions: 

. It guides the company's operations by explaining its future direction and crafting a 
strategy for success. 
. It attracts lenders and investors. 


 

Depending on their circumstances, the entrepreneurial team may require to bring on board 
investors or borrow some money for the business. A good business plan can help attract 
lenders and investors. 


 

3.8.1. Elements of a business plan 

There are no fixed rules on making a business plan. However, it requires sound knowledge of 
such aspects as taxation, financial management, the product to be sold or service to be offered, 
marketing, etc. It is advisable to bring in experts on any of these aspects which an entrepreneur 
may not be familiar with. This may help in making the business plan look more professional and 
convincing. To be attractive, the business plan should be well written, attractive in appearance, 
concise yet comprehensive, logical, simple and easy to read and based on facts and evidence 
as far as possible. It must be informative and interesting to the reader. The better the business 
plan, the better its ability to articulate the issues effectively and the better the chances of 
securing financial support. It must factor in the effect of the external environment and the risk 
reward trade-offs. Generally a business plan will: 

3.8.1.1. Contain the following key elements 

. Description of the enterprise 
. Name of the enterprise 
. Address and telephone number of the business 
. Details of bankers, attorneys and auditors 
. Type of enterprise, primary activities 
. Logo and emblem 
. Mission statement 
. Goals and objectives 


 

The business opportunity must be clearly explained in terms of its primary activities of the 
business and its history if the business is already operational for example. 

. the type of ownership e.g. private company, 
. the organisational structure and 
. staffing (future staffing requirements, etc) 


 

3.8.1.2. Indicate the need for staff 

Indicate the present need for staff (whether full-time or part-time) and the staffing requirements 
for the next three years. Clearly specify the skills required and the staff costs. 

 

 


 

3.8.1.3. Indicate strategies on specific targets and the means to reach them. 

Strategies are significant as they plot the way forward. Focus is on the targets and this 
provides direction in terms of moving forward. 

 

3.8.2. The Marketing Plan 

A marketing plan is a comprehensive document or blueprint that outlines a company's 
advertising and marketing efforts for the coming year. It describes business activities involved 

in accomplishing specific marketing objectives within a set time frame. (www.google.co.za).The 
following are key issues that must be considered in the marketing plan. 

. A description of your specific target market. Who are your customers? 
. The percentage of the market you intend capturing e.g. 10% in the first year. 
. Sales forecasts for the first year of business 
. A description of key customers e.g. Banking institutions 
. A description of your key competitors, their marketing strategies and potential effects on 
your business 
. A description of your marketing mix- Promotion, Pricing, Place and Products. 


 

3.8.3. The Financial Plan 

The financial part of a business plan includes various financial statements that show where your 
company currently is financially, and where it intends to be. This information helps you 
determine how much financing your business needs and helps financiers determine whether 
lending you money or investing in your business is a prudent use of funds. While the financial 
statements are helpful in and of themselves, the data they contain can also be used to calculate 
financial ratios such as gross profit margin, return on investment and return on owner's equity. 
Ratios provide helpful information about a company's liquidity, profitability, debt, operating 
performance, cash flow and investment valuation. (www.investopaedia.com). The following 
must be considered. 

. Start-up cost 
. Calculation of your break- even point 
. A cash-flow statement that captures the cash position on a monthly basis 
. Detailed income statement for the first year showing projected income and expenditure on a 
monthly basis. 
. External financing required and any securities that you have. 


 


http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/870-8/enhancing_61_0.jpg 


3.8.4. The Entrepreneurial Team 

The business plan must have comprehensive Curriculum Vitaes (CVs) for the entrepreneurial 
team. The skills and the experiences of the management team together represent a major risk 
factor. It is important to describe the skills of the entrepreneurial or management team, paying 
special attention to each member’s knowledge of the product or service. 

3.8.5. Manufacturing Plan 

If the business is in the manufacturing sector, then there is a need to include a manufacturing 
plan as follows: 

. Description of manufacturing facilities 
. Capital investment in the manufacturing process and how much will be needed in the next 3 
years. 
. The source of raw materials and their prices. How much will they cost and where will they be 
stored? 
. A list of suppliers and the level of dependence on each. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Illustration 3.8.5. The manufacturing plan (www.google.com) 

 


 

3.8.6. An example of a BUSINESS PLAN 






BUSINESS PLAN FOR KWIK CAR WASH 

DETAILS OF ENTERPRISE:TYPE OF ENTERPRISE: 

Providing customers with exterior and interior car washing. 

ADDRESS OF ENTERPRISE: 30 Primrose Drive, Lenasia 

Tel: 041 2611 1965 

Fax: 041 26 11 1966 

OWNER: Mr Jabu Ndlovu 

BANK: MoneyTec 

ATTORNEYS: AJ Maponya & Associates 

AUDITORS: KMGP 

DATE: 11 August 2016 

PURPOSE OF ENTERPRISE 

The purpose of the enterprise is to provide the following services to its customers: 

. Car washing (exterior) 
. Car cleaning (interior 


 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

The name of the company is KWIK Car Wash. The business will be located in Lenasia. It will be 
a close corporation. Jabu Ndlovu solely owns the company. KWIK Car Wash will be funded by 
an initial investment of R 250 000. Jabu Ndlovu will manage the business. 

 

MISSION 

The mission of KWIK Car Wash is to provide top quality washing service for luxury car owners 
in Lenasia. Jabu Ndlovu will work to keep employees satisfied in order to maintain impeccable 
customer service. 

 

 


 

 

OBJECTIVES 

The objectives for KWIK Car Wash: 

. To be viewed as a premium car wash service in Lenasia. 
. To make a turnover of R500 000 in the second year of operations. 
. To achieve a net profit margin of 20-25%. 


The business requires total capital of R205 405. All of the capital will be financed by means of 
borrowed funds using personal insurance policies as collateral. 

 

The loan will be used to: 

. pay staff for three months. 
. pay initial deposit and rental for three months. 
. acquire assets (truck, washing equipment and cleaning chemicals). 
. pay for initial advertising costs. 


 

BUSINESS INFORMATION 

KWIK Car Wash will be providing customers with two services: exterior and interior car washing. 
It is a close corporation. It is envisaged to start operations on the 1 November 2015. 

Business description 

The office hours will be from 7:00 to 17:30. The business will be busiest on Friday afternoons 
and on the weekends and also just before major public holidays when motorists wash their cars 
before travelling. Pricing will be set at a mark-up of 50% on cost. 

 

PERSONNEL AND ORGANISATION 

In addition to the manager, there will be six people working for the enterprise: 

Driver/messenger 

Cashier 

3 Cleaners 

Bookkeeper 

 

 


 

. Driver with code 10 license and at a least two years experience. 
. Bookkeeper will be responsible for accounting purpose and will come in thrice a week. 
. Cashier will handle all cash and issue receipts. S/he will also answer all telephones. 
. The cleaners are responsible for cleaning the various cars, eg. washing exteriors, 
vacuuming interiors and polishing of vehicles. 


 

MARKETING INFORMATION 

The surrounding area is quite affluent, 50% of the residents earn over R150, 000 a year. There 
are three different car dealerships within a four - km radius which will require car washing 
services for the various fleets. 

 

MARKET ANALYSIS 

KWIK Car Wash will target three main groups of customers: individual car owner and leasers, 
car dealerships, and local businesses. 

The car wash will be based in Lenasia. This area has a number of benefits in terms of the 
market that it will provide for the business. Many people in the neighbourhood own and/or lease 
new cars and place great value on their cars and how the cars look. 

 

MARKET RESEARCH 

KWIK Car Wash is positioning itself as the premier hand car wash serving the Lenasia area. 
Jabu Ndlovu has forecasted a 20% market share. 

 

COMPETITORS 

KWIK Car Wash has no true competitors that are trying to offer a high quality service for a 
reasonable rate. Most are trying to compete on price alone. KWIK Car Wash’s ability to provide 
a high quality service, both in regards to the actual washing as well as customer service is all 
based on their ability to find the best employees. 

Competitors’ strengths 

. Financially sound 
. Good reputation 


 

 


 

Competitors’ weaknesses 

. Long queues 
. Lower end of the market 


The enterprise’s business strengths 

. Providing high quality services. 
. Aggressive advertising strategy 
. Advanced washing technology 


The enterprise’s business strengths 

. Inexperience 
. Cannot attend to a few cars at any given time. 


Advantages of location 

Spacious with plenty of shops so people can be shopping whilst their cars are being washed. 

MARKET 

KWIK Car Wash will target three main groups of customers: individual car owner and leasers, 
car dealerships and local businesses. 

 

Market Segmentation 

KWIK Car Wash segments its customers by type of car ownership. The strategy behind KWIK 
Car Wash target segmentation is to attract customers who will be repeat users and will frequent 
the business in the typically quiet times for a car wash business. 

 

The belief is that the type of car that a person owns says volumes about their driving, and, 
therefore their car washing requirements. 

 

New car owners 

Owners of newer cars are most likely to use a car washing service. These owners take great 
pride in their cars and will bring them often to the wash and detail service. 

 

The aim is to inform these customers that KWIK Car Wash will keep their car looking as good as 
it did the first day they drove it. 

 

 


 

Older luxury car owners 

These people have either owned their high-end luxury cars for several years or are unable to 
afford the expense of a new luxury car but want the feel of relaxed driving. Both of these groups 
want to keep their cars in the best shape possible. These owners will bring their cars in for 
regular washes and occasional details. 

 

Sports car owners 

These people are often younger or middle-aged men and will regard the look of their car as 
important. They will also pride themselves on the look of their car and will have their car hand 
washed (at least) weekly. 

 

Lifetime owners 

Many of these people have owned their cars for more than four or five years and are more likely 
to be women. They like their cars to look presentable, and want to keep it in good shape but are 
not tied up in the look of their car. 

 

Dealerships 

There are five new and used car dealerships within three km of the proposed location of KWIK 
Car Wash. These dealerships often use outside car wash services to clean their vehicles before 
the caps are put up for sale. 

 

Local businesses 

Some local businesses have fleets of cars and small vans that must be kept clean to maintain 
their company image. These businesses will be looking for a cost effective, efficient car washing 
service to perform this service, and will prefer to use a car wash service during the week rather 
than during weekends, like the general public. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ARTICLE 3.1 

SOURCE: Paul Burns (2005) Corporate Entrepreneurship 

 

Richard Branson comes from a well-off background. His father was a barrister and he went to a 
leading private school. However, he was never academic and suffered from dyslexia. 
Nevertheless this did not dent his self-confidence. His mother encouraged this, commenting that 
“bringing him up was like riding a thorough bred horse. He needed guiding but you were afraid 
to pull the reins too hard in case you stamped out the adventure and wildness.” 

He left school at the age of 16 to launch his first business – Connaught Publications – and 
publish Student magazine. This was based in his parents’ house in Bayswater, London. He 
wrote to well-known personalities and celebrities – pop and film stars and politicians – and 
persuaded many to contribute articles or agree to interviews. 

He persuaded a designer to work for no fee, negotiated a printing contract for 50 000 copies 
and got a well-known designer to draw the cover picture. 

The venture was not a success, so in 1970 he set up Virgin Records, originally selling records 
by mail order, at discount prices in order to undercut the competition. But this was also beset by 
problems, not least some allegedly ‘dubious’ dealings with the tax authorities. 

He decided he needed to move to a retail site and persuaded the owners of his first store, 
above a shoe shop in London’s Oxford Street, to let him have it rent free because it would 
generate more customers for the shoe shop. 

Richard Branson may have been lucky to find someone willing to let him have the premises for 
his first Oxford Street record shop rent-free, but when he launched Virgin Atlantic he showed 
that he understood that high capital costs lead to high risks. 

Branson minimized these risks by leasing everything and then being able to offer a good quality 
service at attractive prices. 

 


 

Richard Branson’s main skills are said to be networking, finding opportunities and securing the 
resources necessary for their exploitation. His network of personal influence and contacts is 
legendary. 

Equally important is his ability to bring out the best and motivate people. He does this with an 
informal style and system of communication, facilitated by the company being structured into 
many relatively independent smaller companies, although all under the Virgin umbrella. 

Branson hates formal meetings and has no central headquarters, not even a boardroom, as the 
company does not hold regular board meetings. Instead he prefers to make decisions on a face-
to-face basis, albeit sometimes over the phone, but always developing and testing his personal 
relationships. 

“I have always lived my life by thriving on opportunity and adventure. Some of the best ideas 
come out of the blue, and you have to keep an open mind to see their virtue.” 

3.1.1. Consider the personality and behavioural characteristics of Richard Branson and discuss 
whether or not they are similar to the characteristics and approach of an entrepreneur. 
3.1.2. Evaluate Branson’s approach to the entrepreneurial process from the information 
supplied in the excerpt. 
3.1.3. By making reference to the case study, discuss how strategic business management has 
led to competitive advantage. 
3.1.4. Define and critically discuss organisational performance. 
3.1.5. Establish how the integration of entrepreneurial processes and business management 
enhances organisational performance. 






 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ACTIVITY 3.2 

Read the article below and explain why low-income entrepreneurs fail to sustain their new 
ventures. 

Why low-income entrepreneurs fail to sustain their new ventures by JOSH O’KANE: The 
Globe and Mail Published Wednesday, Jun. 08, 2016 

New research from the University of Toronto gives insight into why low-income areas can breed 
strong entrepreneurship, but often lack the time and capital to make new, novel businesses 
sustainable. A forthcoming paper by Laura Doering, an assistant professor of strategic 
management at the university’s Rotman School of Management, attempts to peruse two 
seemingly conflicting themes in entrepreneurship literature: that poverty has the ability to help 
market creativity, and that it has the power to do just the opposite. By combining extensive 
survey data with on-the-ground interviews in Panama, her research suggests that both these 
themes are at play – but at different stages of a novel product’s life cycle. She found that, in the 
face of personal financial crises or a need to migrate elsewhere, people can be compelled to 
create novel business ideas, but have difficulty keeping them going long enough to sustainably 
profit. 

The research indicates that poverty “limits entrepreneurs’ capacity to profit from the creativity 
they bring to the marketplace,” as creative ideas get stifled by a lack of funding and slow uptake 
by local consumers, who also tend to be poor, and reluctant to try new things. In clarifying the 
gap between two disparate schools of thought, Dr. Doering examines the reasons low-income 
entrepreneurs’ prospects change over the course of business development, and offers an 
opportunity to governments and funding bodies in impoverished markets to create more 
effective policies and programs to support novel businesses. “In an ideal world, I think it would 
be great if we could support low-income entrepreneurs in vetting and developing ideas, because 
so many are under this real-time economic crunch to get businesses started,” she says of her 
research’s implications. The paper will be published in Sociology of Development in the coming 
months. Dr. Doering is perhaps uniquely equipped to examine low-income entrepreneurship. 
Literature on creativity in the marketplace, she says, is generally published in the management 
world; research on poverty and social constraints tends to fall into the realm of sociology. 
Coincidentally, she has a joint doctorate in both sociology and business administration. “Those 
two lines of research don’t often connect with each other,” she says. 


 

She was in Panama on a Fulbright Scholarship in 2011 when she began interviewing local 
small-business owners. “The more I talked with people, the more I was puzzled by the fact that 
everyone seemed to be doing the same thing,” she says. Over time, she realized that these 
entrepreneurs had started with more creative ventures, “but over time, had regressed back to 
the mean, and were doing what everyone around them was doing.” After interviewing 41 low-
income entrepreneurs, she decided to compare that research with a 2009 survey of 2,000 
Panamanian adults conducted for the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). The survey 
offered her a national-level snapshot of the country’s small-business world. It found that low-
income individuals were regularly able to start novel businesses but weren’t always able to 
follow through and establish them in the long-term. The survey alone couldn’t explain exactly 
how this happened. This is where Dr. Doering’s qualitative interviews came into play, helping to 
clarify “the processes through which poverty facilitates and then constrains market creativity.” 
Her interviews – with people whose businesses ranged from Internet cafes to organic 
agriculture consultancies – gave her a much better sense of why so many low-income 
Panamanians’ endeavours failed to take off. First, it turned out, there was a rush: The urgency 
to profit actually hindered the ability to profit. 

Since many businesses were started in the advent of personal financial strain, there was little 
time to vet the business models’ sustainability. And there wasn’t much access to capital to help 
out – Panama’s financial system doesn’t have the infrastructure to easily facilitate money 
transfers between friends and family, for instance. Plus, “It takes a long time for consumers, 
poor consumers in particular, to be willing to try something different,” Dr. Doering says. “One of 
the reasons why poor entrepreneurs weren’t able to sustain the businesses they brought to 
market was because they didn’t have the funds to keep the novel products around while 
consumers were becoming familiar with them.” According to GEM figures cited in the research, 
entrepreneurs account for 17 per cent of low-income persons in developing countries. The 
research, then, could create opportunities for many in the developing world. One, she says 
would be to provide cash grants, rather than loans, to entrepreneurs who are able to show that 
their idea is both novel and strong. And adding to that, she says, countries such as Panama 
could develop targeted incubator or accelerator programs to help new firms can be more 
sustainable. “People can show they have the initial good idea,” she says, “then they could get 
the capital to start, and work with mentors and business development experts to help them 
refine that idea.” (www.google.com) 

 


http://www.gov.scot/Resource/Img/236340/0069533.gif 


ACTIVITY 3.3 

Critique the information provided below in light of the chapter outcomes. 

 

 

Illustration 3.3.1. (www.google.com) 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


 

CHAPTER 4: 

THE ROLE OF INNOVATIVE ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE 
NATIONAL SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of innovative entrepreneurship in the development of a 
country’s socio-economic development. 

This overall outcome will be achieved through the learner’s mastery of the following specific 
outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

 

1. Define and explain innovative entrepreneurship. 
2. Explain the link between ideas and opportunities 
3. Evaluate the role of innovation and creativity 
4. Discuss the approach taken to recognise opportunities 
5. Discuss the importance of innovation as a dimension of entrepreneurship 
6. Describe the steps in the creative process 
7. Explain the components of a feasibility plan 
8. Establish the socio-economic needs of countries. 
9. Analyse the critical role of innovative entrepreneurship in the development of a 
country’s socio-economic development. 


ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

 

 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapters Three and Four 

Rwigema, Urban and Venter (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Two 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 


http://www.design.sabs.co.za/sites/www.design.sabs.co.za/files/SABS-Awards-03.jpg 


 

4.1. Introduction 




Entrepreneurship and economic development are intimately related. The entrepreneurial 
process is a major factor in economic development and the entrepreneur is the key to economic 
growth. Whatever form of economic and political set-up a country has, entrepreneurship is 
indispensable for economic development. Entrepreneurship is an approach to management that 
can be applied in start-up situations as well as within more established businesses. The growing 
interest, in the area of entrepreneurship has developed alongside interest in the changing role 
of small businesses. 

Small business entrepreneurship has a fabulous potential in a developing countries. Statistical 
data and its analyses of several countries show that small industries have grown faster than 
large industries over the last couple of decades. Large industries first lost jobs when small 
industries created new workplaces. Small scale industries lead to the main source of 
employment in the country. 

(https://ideas.repec.org/a/icf/icfjme/v03y2005i4p39-45.html) 

4.2. Innovative entrepreneurship. 




 According to Burns (2007:56), the ability to spot opportunities arising from change and to 
innovate are the two most important distinguishing features of entrepreneurs. Innovation is 
regarded as the prime tool used to create or exploit opportunity and organizations that grow do 
so because they innovate in some way. Creativity is linked to innovation; creativity may 
contribute to innovation and is part of the process of innovation. 

 
(www.google.co.za) 

 


 

 

4.2.1. Innovation defined 






Burns (2007:56) provides three definitions of innovation as quoted by other authors: 

. Kanter (1983) – “the generation, acceptance and implementation of new ideas, processes, 


 products and services ….(which) involve creative use as well as original invention” 

. Mintzberg (1983) – “the means to break away from established patterns” 
. Mellor (2005) – “creativity + application” or “invention + application” 


Thus, innovation is more than just invention and is not necessarily just the product of research. 
Bolton and Thompson (2000:239) stress the importance of creativity in the process of invention 
and innovation. They contend that creativity is the starting point whether it is associated with 
invention or opportunity spotting. Creativity and invention, however, need the entrepreneurial 
context in order to become a business reality. The links between creativity, invention and 
innovation, opportunity perception and entrepreneurship can be represented in the following 
diagram: 

Creativity, invention and innovation 

 

 

ENTREPRENEURIAL ENVIRONMENT 

 INVENTION 

 

 

 

Ability to spot 
OPPORTUNITIES 

 

Ability to be 
CREATIVE 

 

 

 

 

 INNOVATION 

 

 

 

 

SUCCESS 

 

 

Diagram 4.2.1 The Entrepreneurial Environment (Burns, 2007:63) 

 


 

4.2.2. Creativity 






Zimmerer and Scarborough (2005:35) define creativity as the ability to develop new ideas and 
to discover new ways of looking at problems and opportunities. They define innovation as the 
ability to apply creative solutions to those problems and opportunities to enhance or enrich 
people’s lives. Thus creativity is thinking new things, and innovation is doing new things. 

Entrepreneurs succeed by thinking and doing new things or old things in new ways. Having an 
idea is not enough; transforming the idea into a tangible product, service or business venture is 
the essential next step. Successful entrepreneurship is a constant process that relies on 
creativity, innovation, and application in the marketplace (Zimmerer and Scarborough, 2005:35). 
Zimmerer and Scarborough (2005:36) stress that innovation must be a constant process 
because “most ideas don’t work and most innovations fail”. Burns (2007:64) cites Drucker 
(1985) who believes that innovation can be systematically practiced through a creative analysis 
of change in the environment and the opportunities generated by this. 

4.2.3 Opportunity for businesses 

Drucker (1985), quoted in Burns (2007:64) listed seven sources of opportunity for businesses: 

. The unexpected – the ability to react quickly to changes is a commercial advantage and 
information and knowledge are invaluable. 
. The incongruity – unexpected outcomes produce opportunities for businesses who are able 
to spot them 
. The inadequacy in underlying processes – can be improved upon and changed (process 
engineering) 
. Changes in industry or market structure – unexpected change can create an advantage for 
the ‘first-mover’. 
. Demographic changes 
. Changes in perception, mood and meaning 
. New knowledge 


 

 

 

 


Entrepreneurship 


4.2.4. Approaches to Innovation 






Bolton and Thompson (2000:240) suggest three basic approaches to innovation: 

. Have a problem and 
seek a solution 
. Have a solution and 
seek a problem 
. Identify a need and 
develop a solution 


 

 

 Illustration 4.2.4. Approaches to Innovation (www.google.co.za) 

According to Burns (2007:91), creativity is a right brain activity that involves lateral as opposed 
to vertical thinking. It is intuitive, imaginative and rule breaking. It requires interpersonal and 
emotional skills and is people focused. 

The creative process involves four steps and can be represented as follows: 

Burns (2007:81) 

 

1. Generating knowledge and 
awareness 


 

 2. Incubation 

 

 3. Generating ideas 

 

4. Evaluation and 


 implementation 

 

feedback 
loop 

 

 


 

4.2.5 Barriers to Thinking 

Antonites (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2005:51) also list the following barriers to 
thinking and acting creatively: 

. Environmental barriers – from the social, economic and physical environments 
. Cultural barriers 
. Perceptual barriers 
. Intellectual barriers 
. Emotional barriers 
. Time barriers 


 

4.2.5. Stages in the Creative Process 






Antonites (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2005:53) outlines the following stages in the 
creative process (adapted from Williams, 1990 and Nystrom, 1979): 

Stages 

Requirements 

1. Awareness and 
interest 

. Recognition of a problem or situation 
. Curiosity 


2. Preparation 

. Openness to experience 
. Analysis of how the task might be approached 
. Tolerance of ambiguity 
. Willingness to redefine concepts 
. Divergent thought processes (explore many possibilities) 
. Intuitive ability 


3. Incubation 

. Imagination 
. Absorption 
. Seeking ideas, possible answers and solutions 
. Independence 
. Psychological freedom 


4. Illumination (insight) 

. Ability to switch from intuitive to analytical patterns of 
thought 
. Eureka! 
. A-ha! 


5. Verification 

. Critical attitude 
. Analytical ability 
. Testing 




 

 

 


 

4.2.6. Barriers to Creativity 






Burns (2007:83) cites the work of Van Oech (1998) relating to the blocks or barriers to creativity. 
These are: 

. The fallacy that there is only one correct solution to a problem 
. The fallacy that logic is important in creativity 
. The tendency to be practical 
. The tendency to follow established rules unquestioningly 
. The tendency to avoid ambiguity in viewing a situation 
. The tendency to assign blame for failure 
. The unwillingness to recognise the creative power of play 
. The tendency to think too narrowly and with too much focus 
. The unwillingness to think unconventionally because of the fear of appearing foolish 
. The lack of belief that you can be creative 


 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Get Great Ideas 

Aubrey Daniels says that creativity is the key to business and offers ways to motivate 
employees to share their ideas 

An important thing that employees can be taught is that creativity is behaviour. It’s not a brain 
thing. It’s not a mysterious process. It’s not something that only some people have. And being 
weird and eccentric doesn’t necessarily mean you possess it. 

Creativity as an output of human behaviour follows the same laws of behaviour as other 
accomplishments. If this is understood, managers will be able to increase the creativity of 
employees in the organization who are responsible for creative products and services. 
Managers will also be able to increase the number of employees who contribute to creativity in 
the organization. Here are a few things managers can do to increase 




 

 

creativity and motivate people who need to be innovative on the job: 

• Positively reinforce all ideas 

• Make it easy for employees to get new ideas into the system 

• React to ideas as soon as possible 

• Look to unlikely people as a source of fresh ideas – invite ideas from the widest range of 
experience, education, social status and age. 

• Give employees experiences that are far removed from their usual activities – variation is 
the mother of creativity 

• Don’t discount chance – when an environment is created using techniques that favour 
innovation and creativity, things ‘just happen’ to come along at the right time. 

ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE APRIL 2007 ISSUE 



 

4.2.7. Process of Creative Thinking 






Antonites (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2005:52) illustrates the process of creative 
thinking (from Couger, 1995) as follows: 

 

Generating 
ideas 

Developing 
ideas 

Changing an idea into 
a product, service or 
process 

Protecting the result 

 

 

Patent / copyright 

Innovation (creativity) 

Invention 
(creativity) 

Discovery 
(creativity) 

 

 Diagram 4.2.7 Process of Creative Thinking 

4.2.8. Techniques for Improving the Creative Process 






Zimmerer and Scarborough (2005:63) provide three techniques that are useful for improving the 
creative process: 

. Brainstorming is a process in which a small group of people interact with very little structure 
with the goal of producing a large quantity of novel and imaginative ideas. 


 

 

 


Feasibility-Studies.png
. Mind-mapping is a graphical technique that encourages thinking on both sides of the brain, 
visually displays the various relationships among ideas, and improves the ability to view a 
problem from many sides. 
. Rapid prototyping is based on the premise that transforming an idea into an actual model will 
point out flaws in the original idea and will lead to improvements in its design. 


 

4.2.9. Ideas vs. Opportunities 






Antonites (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2005:52) stresses that it is important to 
distinguish between an idea and an opportunity. Resources may be wasted when an idea is 
incorrectly perceived to be an opportunity. 

Opportunities occur in real time and their duration is called the window of opportunity. In order to 
seize an opportunity and achieve market-required returns, the window must be open and remain 
open long enough (Timmons and Spinelli, 2007:125) 

4.2.10. Evaluating Opportunities 






Pretorius (in Kroon, 1998:115) lists the following questions that can be asked to evaluate or 
screen opportunities: 

. What is the scope of the window of opportunity? 
. Is the profit potential adequate to provide a satisfactory return on investment, time and 
opportunity costs? 
. Does the opportunity open up additional options for expansion, diversification or integration? 
. Will the profit stream be 
durable in spite of possible 
obstacles? 
. Does the product or service 
satisfy a real need? 


A start-up can be prevented not by 
a lack of ideas but the inability to 
convert an idea into a workable sustainable plan. (www.google.com) 

A good feasibility plan will identify the essential information needed by funders to make 
decisions about financing. The feasibility plan is meant to be an initial effort to show that a 
business idea can be realised and to give reasons why it will succeed. The plan will describe 
the crucial assumptions underpinning projections for success. 


4.2.11. Feasibility Study 






O’Neill (in O’Neill, Terblanche and Keyter, 1997:163) says that all business ideas must pass a 
crucial test called the feasibility study before they are implemented in practice. 

 Thinkpoint 

The feasibility study determines whether a business idea has the potential to exist as an 
independent economic entity in the market and the potential to achieve the desired profitability 
level in the long term. The total feasibility study can be broken down into five areas of 
investigation:-namely technical feasibility, organisational feasibility, analysis of competition, 
market feasibility and financial feasibility. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE SPECIAL FEATURE: JANUARY 2007 ISSUE 

Driving Innovation for Business Growth by Greg Fisher 

In 2005 and 2006, Apple Computer was identified as the world’s most innovative 
company through research conducted by Boston Consulting Group, piping other 
innovative organizations such as Google, 3M and Toyota at the post. Innovation is playing 
a hugely important role in value creation and success in business. 

The question is how business owners and CEOs embrace the concept of innovation in a 
meaningful and practical way in order to drive profit and growth? 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

Types of innovation 

 

There are different types of innovation and different opportunities for innovation within an 
organisation’s sphere of activities. Traditionally, new ideas have been classified as product 
innovation, process innovation or business model innovation. Two additional types of innovation 
are branding innovation and management innovation. Innovations can also be classified as 
radical or incremental. 

Product innovation – focuses on the creation of new products or services, or on improving the 
features of a current product or service. 

Process innovation – is the creation or improvement of a process by which a product or service 
is produced or delivered. 

Business model innovation – is the creation of new business models or the successful change 
in an element of a business model that substantially enhances a company’s ongoing 
performance in delivering benefits to customers and shareholders. 

Branding innovation – is the creation of value within a business through the development of a 
powerful brand; where an organization differentiates itself or its offerings by building a unique 
brand. 

Management innovation – is the discovery and implementation of new ways of organizing, 
leading, co-ordinating and motivating employees; where managers use a range of new and 
different practices to enhance the performance of people working under them. 

Making innovation part of the business DNA 

There are some distinctive practices that are common to all businesses that seem to be getting 
innovation right. These provide a guide for making a innovation a core competency: 

Leadership – leaders are blatant and clear in their commitment to innovation. Innovation is 
openly stated as a priority. Resources and time are committed to driving innovation in the 
organization. 

 



 

 

 


 

Teamwork – innovative organizations consistently create opportunities for small groups of 
people to work together. Most teams are multi-skilled and are fairly free to determine their 
direction and process for addressing problems and challenges. 

Values – innovation is stated as one of the organizational values. This sends a clear message 
to employees that innovation is important and a key part of their job. 

Stimulation – people need prompting in order to be innovative. A stimulating environment can 
encourage people to innovate. 

Recruitment – getting the right people is fundamental to an innovative culture. 

How to make innovation happen 

A disciplined strategic management process is required to ensure a positive outcome from an 
innovative idea. Canic’s four-phase process of making strategy work can be applied to turning 
innovation into reality: 

Assessment phase – leaders create the time and environment to make innovation happen. 

Positioning phase – establish what the objective(s) is/are in the commitment to innovate. 

Planning phase – an information-driven phase that resources the team to achieve the 
innovation 

Implementation phase – an important phase that ensures that the factors that impact people 
(skills, authority, resources and incentives to processes and structure) are all aligned with the 
key objective. This phase includes commitment building and execution management. 

ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE JUNE 2007 ISSUE 

 



 

4.3. The socio-economic needs of countries. 




South Africa: Economic Policy and Development: Complied by Richard Knight, July 2001 

 "The need to create employment and a better life for our people is the central objective of the 
economic policy of this government. The Reconstruction and Development Program (RDP) 
remains the basic policy framework to achieve this objective. The Growth, Employment and 
Redistribution (GEAR) program is the associated macroeconomic strategy used. At the 
beginning of 2001 the President announced an Action Plan to Accelerate Growth. This action 
plan marked an increased emphasis on macroeconomic reform to further increase 
investment…" Alec Erwin, Minister of Trade and Industry, May 2001 

 

 


 

 "In contrast to this political progress, in socio-economic terms the legacy of apartheid remains 
entrenched and, with the massive loss of jobs in the past decade, even appears to be 
worsening. Wealth is still concentrated in a white minority. The nature of capital remains largely 
the same - concentrated in the mining-finance complex, which continue to dominate the 
commanding heights of the South African economy. 

Serious inequalities persist, with signs of worsening particularly among the formerly 
oppressed. The number of people living in poverty is staggering. Almost half of the population 
lives in poverty, including many of the employed - the "working poor." Unemployment and 
underemployment are on the rise as more jobs are shed and people rely on survivalist activities 
to make ends meet. The complex nature of the transition emerged in deeply contradictory 
government policies." COSATU policy statement, July 2001 

If one reflects on the South African Bill of Rights, then this dialogue must address the social and 
economic problems of poverty, deprivation, racism, xenophobia, discrimination, crime, lack of 
access to health services, education and justice. The aforementioned factors must be identified 
as a remaining blemish and a debilitating obstacle to the future well-being of the people they 
affect. 

The inference is made as it stems from the present situation in South Africa, representing a 
clear indication of South Africa’s struggle with embracing values, spirit and meaning of the 
South African Bill of Rights. The focus must be on equality, dignity and the right to life. 

 

4.5. The Importance of entrepreneurs 




Entrepreneurs occupy a central position in an economy. It is the entrepreneurs who serve as the 
spark plug in the economy's engine, activating and stimulating different economic activities. 
Most nations worldwide can trace their economic success to efforts at encouraging and 
rewarding the entrepreneurial spirit. A society is prosperous only to the degree to which it 
rewards and encourages entrepreneurial activity because it is the entrepreneurs and their 
activities that are the critical determinant of the level of success, prosperity, growth and 
opportunity in any economy. The most dynamic societies in the world are the ones that have the 
most entrepreneurs, plus the economic and legal structure to encourage and motivate 
entrepreneurs to greater activities (Tracy, 2005). 

 


http://image.slidesharecdn.com/microsoftpowerpoint-csr-2009-091104110512-phpapp02/95/corporate-responsibility-and-sustainability-2009-south-africa-13-728.jpg?cb=1361262295 


The South African economy is experiencing a high unemployment problem. In such an economy 
entrepreneurship is critical both in creating the much needed job opportunities for its citizens 
and producing products and services. The trend around the world is that small businesses 
especially the informal sector creates more jobs than large companies. 

 

 

Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

Consider the illustration below and discuss the spheres of sustainability by focusing on the 
various environments that exist within the business world. 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 4.1. 

READ THE CASE STUDY AND ANSWER THE QUESTIONS THAT FOLLOW: 

Alert Shipping Company: A Dream that turned into a Nightmare 

Jabu Khumalo was an excellent team player at Safmarine in Durban, where he was employed 
as a shipping team leader. He was diligent with an excellent work ethic. He was at his desk 
early each morning and left after 16H30 on each workday. His offices overlooked the Durban 
Bay. He was married and had two young children. 

One morning he asked himself, “Can I render this same service to my clients, if I owned an 
operation like this?” In essence companies who needed to export or import goods merely 
needed to get in touch with the shipper and let them know that they had goods to ship or clear 
at the local harbour. At this time the shipping company proved their value to the 
importer/exporter, “by swinging into action” and taking control of all shipping and logistical tasks, 
thereby freeing the shipper to pursue his real aim: marketing. 

So early in the spring of 1982, Jabu tendered his resignation with the mandatory one calendar 
months notice. His team leader persuaded Jabu to stay but could see that his mind was already 
made up. But the moment Jabu communicated his intentions to his manager; the manager 
asked him to leave the plant immediately but agreed to pay him a full salary for his notice 
period. Jabu felt disappointed but left. 

A week later he rented a suite of offices in Smith Street, Durban and started Alert Shipping 
Company. Within a month the agency turned over R180 000. This business started out as a one 
man business with a secretary. The secretary was the wife of his friend, Pilani Nkosi. Pilani was 
persuaded to leave his position at a print shop as an accountant and take over the accounting 
functions for Alert Shipping Company. This he did, but as the order book grew with many of 
Jabu’s clients from Safmarine preferring to deal with him rather than Safmarine, Jabu hired Ram 
Poorun an old friend from his neighbourhood. His task was to monitor clearing and forwarding at 
the dock. 


 

The fact that Ram was a binge drinker did not matter to Jabu as he felt that Ram was competent 
and “they went back a long way”. Soon Jabu’s dad, granddad and wife assumed positions at the 
agency. They had vague job titles but always seemed to be busy at the office. Julian purchased 
four trucks from Olympic Toyota and paid in cash. His dad and granddad were both asked to 
drive them and ferry goods to and from clients’ premises. Two other drivers were hired. Many 
clients preferred to pay cash to the drivers and Jabu didn’t seem to mind as he trusted his “hand 
- picked “staff as he referred to them. One afternoon Jabu confided in Roy Conradie, another 
close friend that despite his order book looking healthy, there just never seemed to be cash 
available and as a result his (Jabu’s) salary was always delayed. Trucks were breaking down 
due to maintenance not being timeously carried out. This resulted in Alert Shipping Company 
hiring trucks on a day to day basis. 

Overdrafts were not serviced on time and this led to meetings with his bank manager that Jabu 
did not relish. Jabu confronted his accountant Pilani about the cash flow crisis and was told to 
speak with his grand dad and dad. Jabu did not want to do this but eventually felt that this was 
something that he had to do. But when he did, both men flew into a rage and asked: 

“How dare you question our honesty….. “. “After all we have done for you…….” They resigned 
with immediate effect and sued Jabu. Both men had no contracts. Three months later, Alert 
Shipping Company closed its doors for the last time. 

4.1.1. Decide whether Jabu was an innovative entrepreneur or not by motivating your answer 
with reference to innovative entrepreneurship. 
4.1.2 Define and explain innovative entrepreneurship. 
4.1.3. Consider Jabu’s actions and explain the link between ideas and opportunities. 
4.1.4. Evaluate the role of innovation and creativity. 
4.1.5. Discuss the approach taken by Jabu to recognise opportunities. 
4.1.6. Argue the importance of innovation as a dimension of entrepreneurship. 
4.1.7. Elucidate the steps in the creative process. 
4.1.8. Explain the components of a feasibility plan. 
4.1.9. Do you believe that companies like Alert Shipping are able to respond to the socio-
economic needs of countries? Motivate your answer by making reference to specific 
socio-economic needs. 
4.1.10. Analyse the critical role of innovative entrepreneurship in the development of a 
country’s socio-economic development. 







 

ACTIVITY 4.2 

Read the article below and answer the questions that follow. 

KZN and the 4th Revolution 

THE MERCURY / 22 Jun '16 

We are ready to steer the province through a time of technological and other change that will 
fundamentally alter the way we live, work and relate to one another, writes Sihle Zikalala. 

Durban - Early this year (2016), world leaders gathered in Davos, Switzerland, at the World 
Economic Forum to discuss the topic “The Fourth Industrial Revolution”, and how countries 
globally needed to respond to this revolution brought about by the rapid change of technology. 

Durban's local government is committed to opening doors to economic opportunities for small, 
medium and micro-enterprises, such as street vendors, says the writer. These enterprises are 
critical for economic growth and development. Picture: Gcina Ndwalane.Credit: INDEPENDENT 
MEDIA 

The topic, according to the World Economic Forum, was inspired by the fact that the “world 
stands on the brink of a technological revolution that will fundamentally alter the way we live, 
work and relate to another. In its scale, scope and complexity, the transformation will be unlike 
anything humankind has experienced, with the potential to raise global income and improve the 
quality of life for populations around the world”. 

Spurred on by the technological advancements of the 21st century, the architecture of the 
global economy is rapidly changing at a pace no one could have anticipated. 

The biggest company in the world today by market capitalisation is no longer a company that 
extracts commodities from the belly of the earth, but Apple - a multinational technological giant. 

Technology has also given rise to the concept of the “disrupters”, companies which are fast 
altering the global economic landscape by introducing new and innovative business ideas. 
These companies, such as Uber, are heeding what Henry Ford said: “If I had asked customers 
what they wanted, they would have said a faster horse.” 

It is against this backdrop that we have assumed the responsibility to lead the Department of 
Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal. 

We have taken the stewardship of this department at a time when emerging markets in the 
world are increasingly playing a key role in altering the global economic landscape, with the 
emergence of Brics, notwithstanding the economic challenges they are facing. 

Africa is emerging as the continent of the future, with the narrative of its rising having gained 
currency in global markets. 


Critically, we have used these difficult economic times to rally all stakeholders for a common 
goal to grow the economy, in line with the old African saying that a boat can only go forward if 
all stakeholders are rowing in sync. 

In this regard, since we were accorded this responsibility by the premier of the province, Willies 
Mchunu, the question that has been uppermost in the minds of many people is: What are our 
immediate priorities? The first thing we want to underscore is that we do not come to the 
department with a magic wand, seeking to deconstruct that which has been neatly stitched 
together as part of the province’s economic patchwork quilt. 

We wish to thank our predecessors, including Michael Mabuyakhulu, who have worked with 
tenacity to put in place the foundation for all of us. 

In the ANC we have always believed that leadership is no different to a relay race. Now that the 
baton has been handed to us, we pledge to run with it, working in tandem with all stakeholders 
in the province. We will be embarking on stakeholder engagement exercises to ensure this. 

We have always subscribed to the idea that the challenges facing KwaZulu-Natal require all 
stakeholders, including business, labour, community and civil society, to work together. 
However, the reality is that it cannot be business as usual if we want to create an inclusive 
economy in which everyone has a stake. 

We believe that radical economic transformation is a prerequisite for all stakeholders if we want 
to create a globally competitive province, anchored on unlocking the potential of all the citizens 
of the province. 

In this regard, we will be focusing on ensuring that our people who were previously relegated to 
the fringes of the economy are brought into the mainstream. This we will do by using, among 
other instruments, co-operatives and small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) to drive the 
agenda of radical economic transformation. 

We want all government departments, as a starting point, to put set-asides for co-operatives, 
youth- and women-owned businesses in line with the resolutions of the procurement indaba 
which was held last year. 

And we want to go a step further and monitor the practical implementation of this resolution. 
This does not mean that we are promoting protectionism in the economy. The reality is that this 
government cannot fold its arms and watch from the sidelines as our people become economic 
spectators in their own country. 

However, in implementing these measures we want to ensure that we do not unwittingly 
promote economic distortions and inefficiencies. As the ANC, we have always subscribed to the 
mixed economy, and our view is that, given the challenges of our times, markets cannot be left 
to their own devices. As the government, we will continue to unashamedly use our economic 
leverage to prise open the doors of economic opportunities for our people. 

This is borne out of the fact that even globally, the notion of a laissez-faire economy anchored in 
the belief that markets are the only avenue for the efficient and equitable allocation of 
resources, has become an anathema since the 2008 global economic meltdown. 


We will also spare no effort in assisting SMMEs so they can play a key role in the economy. 
Research all over the world has shown that they are critical for economic growth and 
development. Critically, we want to rally all stakeholders in the economy to work in tandem to 
stimulate the economy in the province. 

Growing the economy and at the same time creating employment remain our top priority. For 
our province to become globally competitive, we need to harness the collective human potential 
of the people. It is for this reason that we have identified the cutting of red tape as one of the 
key areas of focus to ensure ease of doing business in the province. 

The fact of the matter is that the province is competing with other economic destinations globally 
to attract the shrinking pie of net global investment. If we don’t up our game and make our 
province an investment-friendly destination of choice, investors will simply take their money and 
invest it elsewhere, leaving our people wallowing in despair. 

We cannot afford that. We have committed ourselves to ensuring that we create one-stop-shop 
centres for investors even in secondary towns such as Port Shepstone, Richards Bay, 
Ladysmith and Newcastle. 

This will ensure that investment opportunities are spread evenly throughout the province. We 
will also be focusing with much vigour on stimulating manufacturing, particularly in the textile 
sector, throughout the province. 

And we will work hard to identify and support black industrialists in the province, in partnership 
with national government. For our economy to grow rapidly, we need to ensure that as 
government we create the environment for the previously disadvantaged to play a role, 
especially in sectors where the barriers to entry are high. 

The need to completely change the structure of the apartheid economy, which produces 
inequality skewed along racial lines, also means that we need to focus on building township and 
rural economies. But most importantly, we will also work flat out to increase tourist arrivals to the 
province of KwaZulu-Natal. 

According to the UN World Tourism Organisation, the international tourist arrivals were up by 
4% to reach a record of 1.2 billion in 2015. We are committed to work hard to get a slice of 
these global tourism arrivals, attracting even more international airlines to KwaZulu-Natal. 

Last year the province added another feather to its aviation cap when it attracted Qatar Airways, 
Ethiopian Airlines and Turkish Airlines, which all fly directly to the King Shaka International 
Airport. We need to sustain this momentum by attracting even more airlines to the province, 
while helping the existing ones to sustain their operations. 

We will also see to it that the tourism catalytic projects such as the Drakensberg Cable Car are 
given renewed impetus. The transformation of the tourism industry will be at the summit of our 
list of priorities. It cannot be correct that our people interface with the tourism industry as 
waitresses and front line staff only. Working in tandem with the development finance institutions, 
we want to see more hotels and tourism establishments that will be owned by black people. 

 


 

The attraction of more investments to the two special economic zones, the Dube Trade Port and 
the Richards Bay Industrial Zone, will also be of critical importance. But for KwaZulu-Natal to be 
part of the fourth industrial revolution, we need to intensify our efforts at internet connectivity. As 
we said earlier, the biggest inventions in the world today are technologically driven. 

For us to ride on this wave of the technological evolution, we need to ensure the speedy roll-out 
of broadband throughout the province. Our vision is to create a province where you can get 
connection whether you are at a taxi rank or in a hotel. 

Lastly, by its very nature the change of leadership can be unsettling at times. But we want to 
assure all stakeholders, including business, labour, communities and civil society, that in them 
we see partners who will work with us to take this province to another economic level. 

At times we will have differences about our approaches to how we need to upscale investment 
in the province. But, those differences should not distract all of us from our singularity of 
purpose: to make this province a great place for the generations to come. 

In this regard, we want the people of our province to make a critical evaluation of our work. 

However, that criticism must be tempered by the reality that we are in this together. We stand 
on the cusp of greatness only if we can harness the collective strength of everyone in the 
province of KwaZulu-Natal. 

This will ensure that, in the fullness of time, we will be counted among men and women who 
made their humble contribution to making this province great. 

(http://www.iol.co.za/mercury/kzn-and-the-4th-revolution) 

4.2.1. With the aid of suitable examples from the case study, explain innovative 
entrepreneurship. 

4.2.2. Explain the link between ideas and opportunities by quoting relevant examples from the 
case study. 
4.2.3. Evaluate the role of innovation and creativity as espoused by the author. 
4.2.4. Isolate the approach taken to recognise opportunities as indicated in the article. 
4.2.5. Discuss the importance of innovation as a dimension of entrepreneurship, with special 
emphasis on technology. 
4.2.6. Comment on the socio-economic needs of South Africa as reflected in the article. 
4.2.7. Analyse the critical role of innovative entrepreneurship in the development of a country’s 
socio-economic development. 






 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


 

CHAPTER 5: 
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of how micro and macro environmental factors impact on 
the management and performance of a business. This overall outcome will be achieved through 
the learner’s mastery of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

 

1. Define the micro environment 
2. Define the macro environment. 
3. Evaluate the impact of micro and macro environmental factors on the management and 
performance of a business. 


 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

 

Venter, Urban and Rwigema (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter 

Strydom J. (2012) Entrepreneurship and how to establish your own business. Fourth edition 
Juta. Cape Town Chapter Two 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter One 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


5.1. Introduction 




 

Micro and macro environments have a significant impact on the success of marketing 
campaigns, and thus, the factors of these environments should be considered in-depth during 
the decision making process of a strategic entrepreneur and manager. Considering these 
factors will improve the success of the organisation’s strategic campaign in the long term. 

 

5.2. The Micro Environment 




The micro environment consists of the suppliers, the resellers, the customers, the competition 
and the general public. Culture, diversity and health and safety are also included in the micro 
environment. 

 

5.3. The suppliers 




 Suppliers can control the success of the business when they hold the power. The supplier 
holds the power when they are the only or the largest supplier of their goods; the buyer is not 
vital to the supplier’s business; the supplier’s product is a core part of the buyer’s finished 
product and/or business. 

 

5.3.1. The resellers 






If the product the organisation produces is taken to market by 3rdparty resellers or market 
intermediaries such as retailers, wholesalers, etc. then the marketing success is impacted by 
those 3rd party resellers. For example, if a retail seller is a reputable name then this reputation 
can be leveraged in the marketing of the product. 

 

5.3.2. The customers 






Who the customers are (B2B or B2C, local or international, etc.) and their reasons for buying 
the product will play a large role in how you approach the marketing of your products and 
services to them. 

 

5.3.3. The competition 






Those who sell same or similar products and services as your organisation are your market 
competition, and they way they sell needs to be taken into account. How does their price and 
product differentiation impact you? How can you leverage this to reap better results and get 
ahead of them? 

 


5.3.4. The general public 






Organisations have a duty to satisfy the public. Any actions on the part of the company must be 
considered from the angle of the general public and how they are affected. The public have the 
power to help you reach your goals; just as they can also prevent you from achieving them. 

 

5.2.6. Occupational health and safety 

 

There are other internal influences that affect labour relations in the organisation such as 
occupational health and safety as well as culture and diversity. Organisations need to develop 
policies and procedures with regard to health and safety in the workplace. With reference to 
this, employees need to be educated in: 

. Chemical, physical and psychological stresses on employees prevention of accidents 
. Performance expectations with regard to health. 
. Hygiene regarding transfer of bacterial and viral infection; for example food industries 
accidents resulting in fatalities; 
. Employee’s responsibilities in terms of the Act. 


 

5.2.7. Cultural Diversity 

Issues arise in organisations that create barriers between employees and employers. 
Organisations need to engage in cultural diversity training to enlighten people by making them 
more culturally aware and this will encourage relationship building, 

 

5.3. The Macro Environment. 

The macro environmental variables that must be considered are political, legal, economic, 
social, technological and internationalisation (or globalisation). 

 

5.3.1. Political and Legal Environment 

Business managers must be aware of political and legal forces. Sound marketing decisions 
should always take into account political and/or legal developments relating to the organisation 
and its markets. This refers to the dominant political and legal frameworks within which people 
are living and surviving in a country. In South Africa these frameworks could be said to be 
dominated by the politics of democracy and the legal frameworks that encourage and support 
the democratisation of the working environment. 

 


 

As a result of how democracy was created in this country people are extremely conscious of 
their rights and maybe less conscious of their obligations and duties as South Africans. This 
leads to a specific political environment within business that is ‘rights’ oriented and often 
focuses on the legal solutions to problems as opposed to the social and psychological solutions. 
A new Constitution was adopted in 1994 which underpins the rights of people in South Africa to 
human dignity, equality and freedom. The Bill of Rights chapter in the Constitution extends the 
rights of people. Government is required to meet the basic needs of people through political 
pressure of various political organisations 

5.3.2. Social Environment 

Entrepreneurs and managers must take social and cultural forces into account. The impact the 
products and services your organisations brings to market have on society must be considered. 
Any element or elements of the production process or any products/services that are harmful to 
society should be eliminated to indicate that your organisation is taking social responsibility 
seriously. 

A recent example of this is the environment and how many sectors are being forced to review 
their products and services in order to become more environmentally friendly. Demographic 
forces must also be considered. Different market segments are typically impacted by common 
demographic forces, including country/region; age; ethnicity; education level; household 
lifestyle; cultural characteristics and movements. This refers to the social realities that human 
beings experience every day. These issues are dominated by concerns such as crime and 
transport and housing and infrastructure. They impact enormously on people’s ability to be 
motivated and productive. People who travel long distances to get to work are not able to work 
at the same productivity levels as people who can jump in a car and be at work in 30 minutes. 

Demographic changes have a huge impact on the labour market and therefore affect labour 
relations. The population growth rate in South Africa is now declining but this is not due to the 
decrease in the birth rate. Rather from an increase in AIDS related deaths which cost the 
country and organisations millions of Rand. This has also contributed to loss of skills and placed 
social pressure on employees. Through recession many jobs were lost in the formal sector and 
on the other hand employment in the public sector has grown having adverse effects on 
taxation. 

 


 

Huge differences in education have created an imbalance in the economically active population 
and the unemployment rates remain very high. Huge gaps between the education level of 
workers have lead to employers having to undertake additional training to address these 
imbalances. There has been a rapid increase in the number of women entering the workplace, 
especially in skilled positions, demanding equality in status and pay, maternity leave, childcare 
facilities and freedom from harassment. Due to drought, lack of facilities, poor education, job 
availability, housing and water supplies, more people are moving to cities and urbanised areas. 
This has resulted in an extremely high unemployment rate in cities and crime has grown to new 
heights. 

 

From previous racial policies, inequality between races exists, many people live in shack 
dwellings without the basics of water and electricity and many exist without sufficient income for 
maintaining basic living standards. 

 

Unemployment figures are relatively high and this is one of the biggest challenges for 
government, organised labour and organised business. Because workers often support many 
people on one salary this leads to a demand for higher wages. Because of higher wages few 
jobs exist and employees fear retrenchment, and often seek job protection. As inflation 
increased, the demand for labour decreased and the workers who are employed demand higher 
wages as they have less pay to take home. Productivity levels have not grown as salaries have 
grown over the past 10 years, which places a great strain on relationships between employees 
and employers. 

 

5.3.3 Economic Environment 

Economic factors refers to the fact that the economic environment can impact both the 
organisation’s production and the consumer’s decision making process. This refers to the 
economic realities that people experience in their day to day lives. In South Africa this is 
dominated by the issues of the gap between the rich and poor that leave the majority of the 
workforce at an extreme disadvantage in terms of being able to survive. Economic realities are 
influenced by national economic choices such as whether or not to follow a free market 
capitalist economic system. Economic decisions made by the Reserve Bank, the Ministry for 
Economic Affairs and the Department of Trade and Industry have an impact on how 
organisations will survive and ultimately how the people who work in organisations are going to 
be able to manage their own economic affairs. 


 

5.3.4. The technological environment 

 

Technological advances have produced a revolution in micro-electronics, computer science, 
materials science, energy, telecommunication and so on. Product innovation and design add to 
the technical requirements of skilled employees and often semi-skilled employees require some 
form of technical training. Technological advancement requires changes in the skills needed in 
organisations as well as specialised multi-skilled employees. In certain industries technology 
has streamlined or taken over many manual processes thereby reducing job availability. 
Technological advancement has affected labour relations in the workplace usually through 
legislation introduced to protect employees. 

 

The Labour Relations Act (66/1995) makes provision for the implementation of workplace 
forums where workers need to be consulted on changes of jobs, work methods and technology 
in the workplace. Trade unions, in an attempt to safeguard their member’s interests have 
negotiated collective agreements with many organisations, these agreements include: 

. Clauses protecting workers from technological change whereby management must 
consult with workers prior to implementation; 
. The maintenance of employees’ status in organisations where grading changes take 
place through technological advancement. 


Technological factors focus on the skills and knowledge applied to production. The technology 
and materials needed for production of products and services also impacts the smooth running 
of the business and must be considered. (http:oxfordcollegeofmarketing.com) 

 

5.3.5 Internationalisation (Globalisation) 

 

With South Africa entering into global markets, companies need to remain competitive, 

especially since other countries competing are able to pay much lower wages and have higher 
levels of productivity. These countries produce goods at much lower prices and products often 
superior to South African products. The need to improve productivity is critical to international or 
global competitiveness. 

 

 

 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 5.1 

Read the case study and answer the questions that follow: 

EAT OUT ISN’T ONLY SA’S BEST GUIDE TO SA’S BEST FOOD IN NAME, WE’RE ALSO 
TOP IN THE GAME. 

Eat Out Awards: We have two huge awards ceremonies – with lots of bells and whistles around 
them – twice a year. Their names suggests that one recognises restaurants and chefs, and the 
other acknowledges small producers. 

The Eat Out Restaurant Awards: The annual Eat Out Restaurant Awards, held in November, 
celebrate the South African restaurant industry with accolades including the Top 10 
Restaurants, Chef of the Year, Restaurant of the Year, Service Excellence and awards for Best 
Bistro, Steakhouse, Italian, Asian and Country-style restaurants. 

Our People: People skills, management and leadership are critical to restaurant success. Our 
chefs are creative individuals. They source the best products. Our managers lead with passion 
for people, food and excellence. They have a plan. A food plan. A business plan. A fun plan. 

The Eat Out Produce Awards: The Annual Eat Out Produce Awards celebrate outstanding, 
independent South African producers for their integrity, passion and innovation. Winners are 
those who deliver a consistently high quality product that is South African grown or developed 
using primary produce from South Africa. Due care and consideration for both the environment 
and workforce are essential criteria. In addition to small producers, we also recognize stores 
and markets for their vital role in the process. The awards were established in 2007 and were 
previously known as the Eat In DSTV Food Network Produce Awards and pay tribute to 
entrepreneurs by recognising SMMEs. 

 (Source: http://www.eatout.co.za/awards/) 


http://image.slidesharecdn.com/masterppt-marketingenvironment-mmm-i-b-ii-130923072127-phpapp02/95/marketing-environment-external-environment-ppt-11-638.jpg?cb=1379921057 


5.1.1. ‘People skills, management and leadership is critical to our success.’ The management 
system in an organisation can be conceptualised on two levels. With reference to this 
statement, explain the micro. 






 

5.1.2. With reference to the caselet, fully evaluate the macro environment within which the 
organisation operates. 






 

5.1.3. ‘Winners are those who deliver a consistently high quality product that is South African 
grown or developed using primary produce from South Africa. Due care and 
consideration for both the environment and workforce are essential criteria. In addition to 
small producers, we also recognize stores and markets for their vital role in the process. 
Critique this view. 






ACTIVITY 5.2 

With reference to the illustration below, fully evaluate the impact of micro and macro 
environmental factors on the management and performance of a business. 

 

 (www.google.com) 

 

 

 


 

ACTIVITY 5.3 

Comment on the article below by focusing on the macro-environmental factors that affect local 
and international industries. 

Getting around the city: why electric rickshaws are the tuk of the town 

An electric, zero-emission version of the three-wheeled tuk-tuk is being billed as a short-
distance rival to Uber and taxis in Europe, Africa and Asia E-tuks are being sold in cities in the 
US, South Africa, Europe and south-east Asia. 

Friday 3 June 2016 

Anyone who has been in Bangkok, Delhi or Cairo will be familiar with the lawnmower whirr of 
the mighty tuk-tuk. Nimble enough to weave through traffic jams and narrow streets, the three-
wheeled auto rickshaw is one of the most convenient ways of getting around congested cities in 
the developing world. For residents, they tend to be cheaper than taxis. For tourists, they offer 
the novelty of an open-air view. 

Unfortunately, they are also noisy and highly polluting, black smoke spewing from the exhaust. 
A handful of companies believe they have a solution: an electric, zero-emission version of the 
three-wheeled vehicle. And they hope the clean (and quiet) technology can help popularise the 
tuk-tuk on the more ordered roads of the western world. Tuk-Tuk Factory is a Dutch company 
manufacturing a range of “e-tuks” in Thailand. All powered by battery, the basic three-seater can 
go for more than 60 miles after a five-hour boost with the on-board charger. “My team and I all 
loved tuk-tuks but we wanted to make sure they were environmentally sustainable as well as 
fun,” explains company director Roland Vos. 

The company has sold 800 e-tuks across 30 countries since 2011, mostly countries with no 
history of using the diesel and gasoline-guzzling tuk-tuks. The biggest market so far has been 
Portugal, where they have sold 90 of their electric tuk tuks. Although the novelty factor has 
played a role in raising interest, Vos believes the market in is ready to take off beyond rides in 
tourist resorts and quiet historical districts. 

“We have a lot of resorts and hotels excited about them, and the market among food truck 
vendors is really big,” he explains. “But the use of tuk-tuks as a daily taxi service is also getting 
bigger.” 


 

Transport for London moves to clamp down on rickshaw riders 

Michael Fox is sales director at the e-Tuk USA, a Denver-based company licensing the design 
of the Tuk Tuk Factory’s vehicles and manufacturing them in the US. 

Fox has sold just under 40 of them in the first 12 months in the US and is excited by the idea of 
tuk-tuks filling the so-called “last mile” gap, the distance between a station and a traveller’s final 
destination. As well as ferrying people short distances in downtown areas, he thinks they could 
work well alongside America’s growing public transport system. 

“There’s a lot of competition out there – Uber, taxis and limo services,” Fox says. “But an Uber 
or taxi driver doesn’t want to drive someone four or five blocks, they want to go four or five 
miles. We want to go those short distances, picking people up from a train station and dropping 
them at the stadium, or taking them from the ball game to the bar afterwards.” 

Fox says at a typical rate of $2 per person (£1.50), the e-tuk offers a quick, cheap and eco-
friendly way of making those journeys. 

Businesses hope to persuade transport authorities that e-tuk-tuks could also help ease 
congestion on the roads. “Smaller vehicles carrying a few passengers at a time – it’s a very 
efficient way to get people around,” says South African e-tuk entrepreneur Neil du Preez. 

Yet regulation remains a big barrier, as does the competition. Even if you convince the relevant 
high-level authority to permit tuk-tuks on the road, as e-Tuk USA has with the US Department of 
Transportation, three-wheeler drivers are likely to come up against taxi unions defending their 
precious territory. 

“Every change comes with friction,” says Vos. “The existing taxi world has not been known for 
its flexibility. At the moment this is complementary to the taxi market because last mile and 
touristic transport aren’t always what the taxis are doing. But as the market evolves, I think tuk-
tuks can take a slice of the taxi market in many places.” At $2 per person (£1.50), the e-tuk 
offers a quick, cheap and eco-friendly way of making short journeys. 

In South Africa, Mellowcabs is ready to roll out 50 of its new three-wheeled electric mini cabs in 
Cape Town and Johannesburg over the next few months. Du Preez, who is the company’s chief 
executive, says typical journeys will cost around 30 rand (£1.50), making them around 15% to 
25% cheaper than taxis. “We want them to be used as a real taxi, not as a gimmick,” says du 
Preez. 


 

Mellowcabs has struck an agreement with Uber to have its own three-wheeler drivers feature on 
the ride-sharing app within South Africa. Yet du Preez has had to tread carefully to avoid conflict 
with the country’s powerful minibus industry. 

“We’ve engaged with the operators to make sure we’re complementing what they’re doing and 
not interfering with their routes into residential areas,” he explains. “But the meter taxi cab 
industry isn’t too big in South Africa – we’re okay with seeing them as the competition.” 

Meanwhile, Japanese company Terra Motors is enjoying some success selling its three-wheeler 
electric rickshaws in Asian countries where fossil fuel-burning auto rickshaws still dominate. 
Terra has sold more than 5,000 of them in the Philippines and another 5,000 in India. “The 
authorities in India have big concerns about the environment,” explains Teppei Seki, one of 
Terra’s directors. “Legality is no longer such an issue. Prime minister (Narendra) Modi has 
promoted electric rickshaws in many cities.” 

Electric tuk-tuk businesses may find their most important audience is in replacing old vehicles in 
India and south east Asia. Yet the fundamental strength of the tuk-tuk, its nimble flexibility, 
means it may also have a role to play on the roads of cities all over the world. 

(http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/03/electric-rickshaws) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


 

CHAPTER 6: 

GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding and conceptualise the importance of aligning business 
management processes with the requirements and expectations of government and society. 
This overall outcome will be achieved through the learner’s mastery of the following specific 
outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

1. Outline business management processes. 
2. Explain the expectations of government and society. 
3. Explain the dimensions of business growth 
4. Describe the stages of growth in the business life cycle 
5. Distinguish between growth strategies 
6. Contrast business decline with business failure 
7. Identify early warning signs of pending trouble 
8. Explain the causes of business failure 
9. Distinguish between different methods of harvesting 
10. Conceptualise the importance of aligning business management processes with the 
requirements and expectations of government and society. 


 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

Van Aardt, Hewitt, Bendeman, Bezuidenhout, Janse van Rensburg, Naidoo, Van Aardt, Van 
Der Bank and Visser (2011) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fourth edition. 
Oxford Chapters Seven and Seventeen 

Rwigema, Henry and Venter, Robert. (2004). Advanced Entrepreneurship. Cape Town. Oxford 
University Press – Chapter Fifteen 


http://interfacing.com/uploads/images/Icons/Process-lifecycle-management.jpg
http://www.attuneww.com/sites/default/files/images/business_process_management.png
Nieman, Gideon., Hough, Johan and Nieuwenhuizen, Cecile (Editors). (2003). 
Entrepreneurship: A South African Perspective .Pretoria. Van Schaik – Chapter Thirteen 

Wickham, Philip A. (2001). Strategic Entrepreneurship. A Decision Making approach to New 
Venture Creation and Management. Second edition Harlow. Prentice-Hall – Chapter Twenty 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapter Fifteen 

Venter, Urban and Rwigema (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Five 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Nineteen 

6.1. Introduction 




As entrepreneurs and managers, it is critical to conceptualise the importance of aligning 
business management processes with the requirements and expectations of government and 
society. This can be achieved through your mastery of specific issues such as business 
management processes, the expectations of government and society and being able to align 
business management processes with the requirements and expectations of government and 
society. It is also crucial to understand business processes management. 

 

6.2. Business process management 




The following pictorials depict the business process management. The goal of Business 
Process Management is to reduce human error and miscommunication and focus stakeholders 
on the requirements of their roles. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 (www.google.com) 


 

Business Process Management is a subset of infrastructure management, an administrative 
area concerned with maintaining and optimising an organisation's equipment and core 
operations. Business Process Management is often a point of connection within a company 
between the line-of-business and the information technology department. When studying 
Business Process Management, there is an adherence to the basic rules of programming, so 
that processes designed in either language are easy for developers to translate into hard code. 
There are three different kinds of BPM frameworks available in the market today. Horizontal 
frameworks deal with design and development of business processes and are generally focused 
on technology and reuse. Vertical BPM frameworks focus on a specific set of coordinated tasks 
and have pre-built templates that can be readily configured and deployed. Full-service BPM 
suites have five basic components: 

. Process discovery and project scoping 
. Process modeling and design 
. Business rules engine 
. Workflow engine 
. Simulation and testing 


While on-premise business process management (BPM) has been the norm for most 
enterprises, advances in cloud computing have lead to increased interest in on-demand, 
software as a service offerings. 

6.3. Expectations of government and society. 




Entrepreneurship has benefits for the economy, society and the entrepreneur. Benefits to the 
economy and society and entrepreneur include: 

. The establishment and management of small businesses. 
. The sale of products and services and the creation of employment. 
. Benefits to the entrepreneur from self-fulfilment by doing what they enjoy, reaping 
profits, contribution to society to recognition for his/her efforts. 


 

 

 

 


 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

Read the article below and explain why entrepreneurial support is extremely crucial and critical 
to growth in Africa. 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUPPORT IS PIVOTAL TO AFRICA’S ECONOMIC GROWTH 

BY RAPHAEL OBONYO, MAY 31 2016 

With most African countries diversifying from traditional sources of income, entrepreneurship is 
increasingly seen as a key to economic growth. So far, it has yielded huge returns for 
entrepreneurs, and experts say there is great untapped potential to drive the African continent 
into its next phase of development. A June 2015 study by UK-based Approved Index ranked 
African countries among those at the top of the entrepreneurship charts. The Entrepreneurship 
around the World report listed Uganda, Angola, Cameroon, and Botswana among the top 10 
countries. 

The group regards entrepreneurship as a "necessity", saying in its report: "When unemployment 
is high and the economy is weaker, people are forced to start small businesses to provide for 
themselves and their families." 

Today, entrepreneurship is seen as one of the most sustainable job-generation tools in Africa. A 
2013 study by Brookings Institution, a Washington DC-based think-tank, found that African 
youth (15-24 years) constitute about 37% of the working-age population. 

At the Global Entrepreneurship Summit held in Nairobi in 2015, and attended by US President 
Barack Obama, entrepreneurs from more than 100 countries and a group of US investors 
discussed the role entrepreneurs could play to tackle youth unemployment in Africa. 

According to Evans Wadongo, listed by Forbes Africa as one of the most promising young 
African entrepreneurs, many African governments have not been keen on developing policies to 
deal with youth unemployment. "Governments are not doing enough. The private sector is 
trying, but most goods brought into the African market are from China. This denies the youth 
much-needed manufacturing jobs, which are more labour intensive," he says. 


Kenya’s cabinet secretary in the Ministry of Industrialisation and Enterprise Development, Adan 
Mohammed, however, defends the policies of most African governments, saying that their 
efforts have been spurring confidence in the continent, and are enabling more young people to 
turn towards entrepreneurship. "Success breeds success — as many entrepreneurs make 
headway, others get on board. Also, technology-based inventions are pulling entrepreneurs," he 
says. 

Ugandan Prime Minister Ruhakana Rugunda says his government’s efforts to promote 
entrepreneurial culture have produced "remarkable results". For instance, the state-run Youth 
Venture Capital Fund trains and provides money to young people with good business ideas. 
Most importantly, with youth comprising more than 75% of its population, and 83% of its 
unemployed, Uganda has remodelled its education system to include entrepreneurship as one 
of the subjects in secondary schools and colleges. 

With the help of the private sector and development agencies, the Ugandan government has 
established information, communication, and technology innovation hubs that help 
entrepreneurs to launch start-ups. Lack of access to working capital has hampered 
entrepreneurship in Kenya. Even though the government has created the Youth Enterprise 
Development Fund and Uwezo Fund to support youth entrepreneurship, budgetary constraints 
limit their effects. Andrew Wujung, an economics lecturer at the University of Bamenda in 
Cameroon, attributes the country’s entrepreneurship effort to its unique poverty-reduction 
strategy. Unlike other countries in Africa, Cameroon’s poverty-alleviation strategy is linked to 
entrepreneurship. The government is organising robust skills-acquisition and training 
programmes for entrepreneurs, and making credit facilities easily accessible to people with 
innovative technological and business ideas. 

For entrepreneurship to boost Africa’s economy, governments must tackle some of the greatest 
challenges that impede its progress, including lack of funds, mentorship, and poor government 
policies. African governments should consider giving the private sector incentives to create 
more jobs through tax relief. Laws and regulations should favour entrepreneurs, and effective 
strategies and policies are required to create more employment within small and medium 
enterprises. 

• Obonyo is Africa’s representative to the World Bank’s global co-ordination body and a Ford 
Foundation fellow. This article first appeared in Africa Renewal, published by the UN. 
(www.bdlive.co.za) 

 


 

6.3.1. Business growth 






Business growth is critical to entrepreneurial success. The potential for growth is a defining 
feature of the entrepreneurial venture. Growth is a dynamic process. It involves development 
and change within the organisation, and changes in the way the organisation interacts with the 
environment (Wickham, 2001:303). Rwigema and Venter (2004:437) cite Wickham (1998) who 
says that three factors distinguish an entrepreneurial venture from conventional small business 
– the extent of innovative practice, the potential for growth and the presence of strategic 
objectives. The dynamics of growth for the entrepreneurial venture can be viewed from four 
perspectives: 

 

 Dynamics of Growth 

 

 

 Financial Growth 

 Strategic Growth 

 Structural Growth 

 Organisational 

 Growth 

Performance 

Resources 

Asset 
accumulation 

Direction 

Use of assets 

 

 Figure 6.3.1. Dynamics of Growth (Wickham, 2001:304) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://static8.depositphotos.com/1472772/978/i/950/depositphotos_9787312-Business-financial-growth-concept.jpg
Strategic Growth 


6.3.2. Types of growth 






Wickham (2001:304) explains that the four types of growth are not independent of each other. 

The four perspectives are financial growth, strategic growth, structural growth and 
organisational growth. 

 

 

Financial growth 

This relates to the development of the 
business as a commercial entity and the 
increases in turnover and resulting profits, 
and the assets of the business. 

 

Financial growth measures the value 
created by the business and is an important 
measure of success 

 

 

 

 

Strategic Growth 

This relates to the changes that take place as the 
business interacts with its environment and the way 
capabilities are developed in exploiting opportunities 
and acquiring assets to create sustainable competitive 
advantage. 

 It may further be defined as strategy aimed at winning 
larger market share, even at the expense of short term 
earnings. 

 Four broad growth strategies are 
diversification, product development, market 
penetration, and market development. ( www.businessdictionary.com/) 

 

 

 

 


http://www.global-economic-symposium.org/knowledgebase/investing-in-asia-2013-cyclical-or-structural-growth-slowdown/photo_overlay
http://iveybusinessjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2007/07/iStock_000042856622_Large.jpg 


 
Structural growth 

This relates to the changes in which 
managerial roles and responsibilities, 
reporting relationships, 
communication links and control 
systems are organised (internal systems). Structural growth considers the structure of an 
organisation as dependent on five ‘contingencies’ or types of factors The structure of an 
organisation could be viewed as being dependent on five ‘contingencies’ or types of factors:- 

. Organisation’s size 
. Operational technology it uses to create value 
. The strategy it adopts 
. The environment it is in 
. The way power is utilised within it 


 

Organisational growth 

This relates to changes in the organisation’s 
processes, culture and attitudes as it develops. 
According to Rwigema and Venter (2004:438), 
organisational growth refers to ‘improvement in 
processes, learning and knowledge; and 
prevailing belief systems’. 

 

An adaptation of the four major perspectives of growth and development is presented by 
Nieman below. (Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:236): 


 

 Direction 

FINANCIAL GROWTH 

 Increase in value 

 STRATEGIC GROWTH 

Strategic interaction with the environment 

 STRUCTURAL GROWTH 

 Changes in internal systems and assets 

 of the venture 

 ORGANISATIONAL GROWTH 

 Changes in organisation’s processes, 

 culture and attitudes 

Asset 

accumulation 

 

Use of assets 

 

Supports 

 

Executes 

 

Resources 

Performance 

 

Resources 

Performance 

 

 Figure 6.3.2 Four major perspectives of growth and development 

 

6.3.3. Strategic characteristics of organisations 






Nieman (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:235) list eight characteristics of growing 
organisations according to Crijns and Ogle (1997:56). These strategic characteristics are: 

 

. Market domination – measured in terms of relative market share in a niche market, it 
differentiates between good and poor performance 
. Differentiation – uniqueness through being different from competitors 
. Product leadership 
. Flexibility – the speed and ability to gain advantage from new opportunities 
. Innovation 
. Future orientated 
. Export 
. Related growth – successful businesses strive for active cognisant growth as opposed to 
uncontrolled growth. 


 

 


 

Nieman also cites Vinturella (1998) who refers to the critical success factors for growth as: 

. Market intelligence – to be able to perceive and adapt to market changes, including future 
trends, competition and customer feedback 
. Strategic leadership – to provide clear direction, delegation and decision-making. 
. Clarity of purpose and direction – to have vision and a shared understanding of the 
uniqueness and identity of the business 
. Strategic planning 
. Internal infrastructure – to be able to support the business through internal systems and 
structures. 


 

6.4. Business Life Cycle 




 

Rwigema and Venter (2004: 444) contend that it is useful to conceptualise the process by which 
a business grows as a series of phases following a timeline. This ‘life cycle’ approach illustrates 
the growth phases that a business traverses. 

 

Nieman (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:238) cautions that life cycle models must 
be used as a guide. ‘Although they provide an indication of what can happen at a certain stage, 
they have little power to predict what will happen. The defining line and time frames of each 
stage are not clear’. 

 

Other limitations are: 

. It is difficult to say at a particular time exactly what stage a venture has reached and when it 
can be expected to move on to the next stage 
. Individual businesses will move through different stages at different rates and may miss out 
some stages altogether 
. Not all businesses begin at the first stage and move to the last stage 
. Very few businesses experience smooth and linear stages of growth. The smooth S-shape 
curve is rarely replicated. The progress of most businesses will actually be a ragged and 
jagged line with many ups and downs as companies experience periods of rapid progress 
followed by setbacks and accompanying crisis. 


 

 

 


 

6.5. Forms of business ownership 




One of the first decisions that you will have to make as a business owner is how the company 
should be structured. This decision will have long-term implications, so an accountant and 
attorney should be consulted to help select the form of ownership that is right for you. In making 
a choice, you will want to take into account the following: 


. Your vision regarding the size and nature of your business. 
. The level of control you wish to have. 
. The level of structure you are willing to deal with. 
. The business' vulnerability to lawsuits. 
. Tax implications of the different ownership structures. 
. Expected profit (or loss) of the business. 
. Whether or not you need to reinvest earnings into the business. 
. Your need for access to cash out of the business for yourself. 


 

6.5.1. Sole Proprietor 






The sole proprietor (also called the sole trader) is without question, the simplest and most 
popular form of ownership. This form of business is also called the sole trader. The sole 
proprietorship, as its name implies, is a business owned and managed by one individual and in 
most cases where the owner also manages the business. Examples include flea-market stalls, 
laundries, butcheries and hairdressers. A sole proprietor can conduct business under his/her 
name or under a trade name. For example, let’s say that Slindile Sandile is a plumber. She can 
conduct his business under her name, Slindile Sandile Plumbers. Alternatively, he can conduct 
the business under a trade name such as Very Efficient Plumbers. 

6.5.1.1. Advantages 






. It is the least regulated form of business ownership and therefore the easiest to 
start, operate and terminate. 
. It is the least expensive form of ownership to establish. There is no need to create and file 
legal documents that are recommended for partnerships and required for corporations. 
. The main advantage of this type of business is that the owner gets all the profits (less taxes, 
of course) should the business prosper, so this is an incentive to work hard. 
. The owner is in total control of operations, so he/she can respond quickly to changes, which 
is an asset in a rapidly changing environment. 



 

6.5.1.2. Disadvantages 








The disadvantages to the sole proprietorship include: 

. The sole proprietor has to take responsibility for the running of the business including losing 
everything should the business fail and being personally liable for all the businesses debts. 
. A sole proprietor may not have the wide range of skills required in running a successful 
business. 
. The business could lack sufficient capital because the owner has to rely on his or her own 
savings or take a loan. 
. If the proprietor dies, retires, or becomes incapacitated, the business may terminate, unless 
a family member or employee can take over, the business could be in trouble. 


 

6.5.2. Partnership 






When two or more people agree (whether verbally or in writing) to become co-owners of a 
business, the organization is called a partnership. The contract can be between a minimum of 
two and a maximum of twenty persons, who contribute capital, goods or expertise to the lawful 
business with the purpose of making a profit. A partnership is not a legal person and therefore 
all partners are jointly liable for the debts and obligations of the business. 

6.5.2.1. The advantages of choosing the partnership as a form of ownership include: 

. Like the sole proprietorship, the partnership is easy and inexpensive to form because less 
regulated. 
. The parties’ skills and abilities usually complement one another, strengthening the 
company's managerial foundation. 
. There are no restrictions on how partners distribute the company's profits as long as the 
method is consistent with the partnership agreement and does not violate the rights of any 
partner. 
. The partnership can significantly broaden the pool of capital available to a business. 


 

6.5.2.2. The disadvantages of a partnership 

. Partners have unlimited liability for the partnership’s debts and usually take an active role in 
managing the business. 
. The partnership is dissolved if there is a change in its membership composition. the duration 
of a partnership is therefore uncertain. 



. It is not easy to find suitable partners. 
. Partners are jointly liable for the debts incurred by other partners. 


 

6.5.3. Private Company 






The private company has a minimum of one and a maximum of fifty shareholders. The transfer 
of shares is restricted which means that shares cannot be sold to the public. Shareholders have 
limited liability for the debts of the business. The name of the company must end in ‘Proprietary 
Limited’ or the letters ‘(Pty) Ltd’, for example Archer Bank (Pty) Ltd. This means that the number 
of shareholders is limited. A private company’s shares cannot be sold to the public to raise 
capital. Therefore the shares cannot be listed on the stock exchange (the JSE, for example). 

6.5.3.1. Advantages 






. Private companies form a separate legal entity with limited liability for to the shareholders. 
. Business continuity is assured since shares can be passed without affecting the company. 
. Private companies are suitable as family businesses. 
. The company and its members are taxed separately. 


 

6.5.3.2. Disadvantages 






. It is a complex process to establish and manage a private company. 
. A private company must meet such costs as incorporation costs, annual subscriptions and 
the cost of issuing shares. 
. As a result of the compulsory publication of its statement, everyone including its competitors 
knows the company’s information. 


 

6.5.4. Public Company 






A public company is the form of business that has seven or more shareholders and where the 
shares are sold to the public. Such large, publicly owned companies might have thousands of 
shareholders. Absa, listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) is an example of a 
public company. A public company can raise a large amount of capital from the general public. 
Investors with small amounts of money are also able to invest in this type of ownership. 
However, the costs of becoming a public company are high and the procedure of establishing 
the business is complicated. 

 


http://venturegrowth.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Final_Version.jpg 


6.6. Venture Growth 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 (www.google.com) 

 

If you want to start a business today, it seems or appears to be uncomplicated or even easy. 
The internet gives you access to business ideas, information about the market and areas that 
you want to operate in. Information about potential suppliers that you can use is also available. 

Information on advertisers to promote businesses and their products and services can also be 
obtained. A business is established to succeed and not to fail. However, thousands of 
businesses still fail due to a lack of knowledge about the legal aspects regarding the continuous 
operation of the business, dealing with staff and signing contracts. 

 

Timmons and Spinelli (2007:260) illustrate the stages of venture growth as follows: 


 Sales 

R & D 

Startup 

High 
growth 

Maturity 

Stability 

Time (years) 

 Figure 6.6.1 Stages of venture growth 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

Nieman (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:238) presents a similar illustration of the model: 

Nieman (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:241) cites Crijns and Ooghe (1997) 
relating to the actions and changes taking place in the different stages of the growth process. 
These changes are referred to as the ‘professionalisation’ of the entrepreneur and are indicated. 

Pre-start-up 

(incubation) 

Start-up stage 

(infancy) 

Growth stage 

(breakthrough) 

Maturity 

Decline 

Rejuvenation 

Time 

Professionalisation of the entrepreneur 

Aspect 

Start-up 

Early growth 

Later growth 
(expansion) 

Maturity 

Strategic objectives 

Survival 

Maintenance of 
profitability and 
acquiring resources 

Growth via 
expansion 

Return on 
investment and 
market value 

Structure 

Informal 

Functional 

Decentralized 

Matrix or product 
groups 

Control Systems 

Direct market 
feedback 

Standards and cost 
centers 

Profit centres and 
formal reporting 

Planning and 
investment centres 

Management Style 

Creative 

Leading 

Delegating 

Coordinating 

Role of the 
entrepreneur 

Owner-worker 

Owner-manager 

General manager 

Controller 

Function of the 
entrepreneur 

Direct supervision 

Overall supervision 

Indirect control 

Controlling interest 

Focus of the 
entrepreneur 

Make and sell 

Efficient operations 

Market expansion 

Consolidation and 
innovation 



Table 6.6.2 : Professionalisation of the entrepreneur 


 

6.6.1. Growth Stages 






The growth stages are conception, survival, profitability/stabilisation, profitability/growth, take off 
and maturity. 

6.7. Challenges to the organisation 

Rwigema and Venter (2004:456) acknowledge that while growth is a process that enhances 
value (from both a societal and individual perspective) it also poses challenges to the 
organisation: 

. Financial implications of growth – the act of conducting business requires cash, so that the 
financing requirement must be recognised. 
. Management and control issues – a growing organisation places a burden on functional 
capacity. There must be formality, consistency and routine. 
. Marketing and operations implications – growth often occurs through either a production 
orientation or a marketing orientation. As the business grows, conflict between these two 
functions becomes likely. 
. Biological implications - the advance of years raises issues of succession 
. Organizational implications – a growing business requires more people and more managers 
and has to be flexible and adaptable. 
6.8. Managerial actions 




Kuratko and Hodgetts (1998:504) outline four key factors about the specific managerial actions 
necessary during the growth stage. These factors are listed as control, responsibility, tolerance 
of failure, and change. 

They amplify these factors as follows: 

. Control – growth creates problems in command and control. 
. Responsibility – as the business grows, the distinction between authority and responsibility 
becomes more apparent. This is because authority can be delegated, but is important for 



there to be a sense of responsibility. This action establishes flexibility, innovation and a 
supportive environment. 
. Tolerance of failure – in continually innovating and growing, a business should tolerate a 
certain degree of failure. Three forms of failure can be distinguished – moral failure, resulting 
from a violation of internal trust, personal failure, brought about by a lack of skill or 
application, and uncontrollable failure, caused by external factors. 
. Change – planning, operations and implementation are all subject to continual change. 
Flexibility regarding change allows for faster managerial response to environmental 
conditions. (Kuratko and Hodgetts.1998:504) 


 

Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

Read the article below and highlight the key points that you believe entrepreneurs should be 
aware of. 

Serial entrepreneur Sivadas Raghava offers practical wisdom for wanna-be 
entrepreneurs: May 29, 2016 

B-school graduates are generally not successful entrepreneurs, they are taught to manage and 
not to take risks, or so goes the adage. Of late, a slew of entrepreneurs with MBAs from top B-
schools have been proving this maxim wrong by spawning successful ventures. Sivadas 
Raghava, a 1983 batch MBA from IIM-Ahmedabad, one of the top B-schools in the country, and 
also a batch mate of the present IIM-A director, Ashish Nanda, is one, but, as he says himself, it 
took him 17 years to be an ‘overnight’ success. In his book, Failure to Millionaire, published by 
Sage India, Sivadas catalogues his trials and tribulations, his hard luck stories, his mistakes, the 
grind of entrepreneurship, trying out venture after venture till he and his partners hit pay dirt. 

Falls and more 
Nine startups, six failures, a couple of moderate take-offs and one complete success which 
finally proved to him that quitting a plum job to plunge into entrepreneurship was the right choice 
he had made. 


Raghava writes, warts and all, on his failures, the mistakes he made along the way, the 
imprudent, in retrospect, projects he embarked on, the hard luck stories, and the frugal early 
years. When Raghava struck out as an entrepreneur in the mid-1980s, the business 
environment wasn’t conducive for the professional manager wanting to set up shop on his own; 
you were either from a business family or thrived on the Licence Raj regime. 

Getting funding for a good idea wasn’t easy; there were no venture capitalists, no angel 
investors, no incubator cells, no entrepreneur eco system as it is today. You either had the cash 
or raised it from family and friends; even banks would look at you suspiciously. 

And, as he writes, his family had an apoplectic fit. “At that time, there was a huge price tag to 
becoming entrepreneurs, especially for professionals with my kind of background,” he writes. 
Looking back, he says he was was a bit foolish, “chucking up a good job with a leading private 
sector company, with no business background or support, and just an all-consuming desire to 
make a success of being an entrepreneur.” 

But stay the course he did. And, there is no guarantee of success, but the fire in your belly must 
drive you, he writes. Becoming an entrepreneur requires arduous work and there is no 
organisation supporting you; you are your own man, which struck Raghava forcefully when he 
set out on his own. 

Many learnings 
Raghava meticulously catalogues his entrepreneurial journey and the takeaways at each stage 
of his entrepreneurial life cycle. For an aspiring entrepreneur it will be a useful read to avoid the 
missteps he made. A burning desire to be an entrepreneur is all very well, but that by itself is not 
enough. One needs a good business idea, validation of the concept and preferably a beta 
customer, he advocates. Raghava writes that he learnt a valuable lesson in his very first 
venture: making motor pumps. He invested 50 per cent of his savings and the project turned out 
to be a disaster. It started with the fanciful name they gave themselves: the Flamingo Group, 
which, in his own words, sounded like the name for a night club. Coimbatore was the land of 
perhaps over 100 motor pump makers and their product was not unique. “The first lesson we 
learnt was the importance of making ourselves unique and differentiating ourselves. We learnt 
about USP in case studies at business school, but our experience taught us to translate this to 
marketplace realities. It’s simple and obvious but many people make this basic mistake of not 
defining the USP of a product or service,” Raghava notes. 

 


 

From this disastrous first venture, which didn’t douse his passion luckily for him, Raghava 
transitioned through many other ventures, winding down the unsuccessful ones, or selling the 
moderately successful ones, till he and partner (also his classmate at IIM-A), Chandu Nair, 
founded Scope eknowledge Centre, and rode the KPO boom. In between, to keep some funds 
coming, in their early years, Raghava and his partners even structured and taught courses to 
MBA students of Bharathiar University in Coimbatore. Scope was among the first in the 
knowledge process outsourcing space to several key clients overseas. They ran the company 
for 10 years before selling it to Raman Roy of Quatrro. 

Social being 
Raghava’s style is anecdotal and conversational, dipping into his long entrepreneurial career to 
illustrate the points he makes. The book is interspersed with fables and stories which were key 

the learnings for Raghava in his formative years as a young entrepreneur. 

They are useful reading for aspiring entrepreneurs as well. The book offers key takeaways from 
each stage of Raghava’s growth as an entrepreneur; each of these is different at different 
stages of the entrepreneurial life cycle and Raghava has been through that not once, but 
several times. The book offers practical advice on various business issues one could face: 
marketing to business development and managing operations to fund raising and managing 
finances. 

Lastly, Raghava stresses the importance of not being troubled by just that: stress. He talks of 
the importance of a work-life balance. As he says: “After all, you have only one life. Do you want 
to spend nearly all of your 24 hours at work? I think it’s important to have a holistic life and enjoy 
the process of entrepreneurship…” His advice is to include physical exercise as part of one’s 
day, partake of a healthy diet, meditate, and make social contributions, for “small acts of social 
service go a long way in improving one’s general well-being.” An MBA from a top B-school can 
indeed succeed as an entrepreneur and Raghava shows how. About the Author: Sivadas 
Raghava is the director and global head of services at RSI Content Solutions, USA. He is an 
innovative entrepreneur and a serial entrepreneur. He has a post graduate degree in 
management from IIM-Ahmedabad. (http://www.thehindubusinessline.com) 

 

 


 

6.9. Business decline 




Rwigema and Venter (2004:464) offer definitions of business decline contending that the reality 
of business practice is that many businesses fail: 

. Business decline – occurs when a business experiences a successive decline for a period of 
not less than two years 
. Business failure – either the inability of the business to meet its financial obligations or the 
discontinuation of the business (lack of managerial capacity or desire to continue operating) 
. Turnaround situation – a period during which the business is engaged in efforts to restore 
profitability 


Pretorius (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:262) refers to levels of failure on a 
continuum of success and failure: 

Trouble or difficulty in the business 

 

 

 

The business that is performing well 

 

 

 

The underperforming business 

 

 

 

The business that failed 

 

 

 

The business in crisis 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

These levels of failure is depicted in the following illustration. 

 

 

 

Success Continuum Failure 

Performs well 

 Underperforms 

 Trouble 

 Crisis 

 Failure 

Loss of 
control 

 Figure 6.3.10.: The levels of failure on a continuum of success and failure 

 

Figure 6.9.1.The levels of failure on a continuum of success and failure 

 

 

The ‘signs of trouble’ or the symptoms of business decline are: 

 

. Declining profitability – decline in gross and net margins 
. Decreasing sales volumes 
. Declining market share 
. Decline in working capital 
. Rapid management turnover 
. Top management fear 
. Irregular cash flows 
. Confidence levels drop 
. Core employees leave 


(Rwigema and Venter, 2004: 464; Pretorius in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:262) 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

6.9.1. Causes of business failure 






 

Rwigema and Venter (2004: 466) outline the causes of business failure as: 

. Poor management 
. Inadequate financial control 
. Competition 
. Relatively high cost structure 
. Changes in market demand 
. Marketing problems 
. Capital projects 
. Acquisitions 
. Overtrading 


 

Pretorius (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:272) examines four issues that underlie 
signs of trouble: 

. Strategic issues – relating to the effectiveness of the business within its environment. 
Strategic issues include misunderstood positioning, mismanaged relationships with suppliers 
and customers, diversification into an unrelated business area, being idea driven instead of 
opportunity driven, having no contingency planning, lack of specific sectoral experience and 
unrealistic expectations of the market potential. 


 

. Management issues include loss of interest by the owner, underestimating the importance of 
financial aspects, turnover in key personnel, a wrong management focus and a lack of a 
proper management structure. 


 

. Poor planning and financial systems, practices and controls – this refers to incorrect pricing, 
poor credit-granting policies, poor use of leverage (debt), the lack of cash budgets, poor 
management reporting, lack of standard costing and poorly understood cost behaviour. 


 

. Environmental issues – include customers, suppliers, competitors and intermediaries from 
the market environment of the business. 


 

 

 


 

 

6.9.2. Harvesting 






Harvesting refers to an exit plan for the entrepreneur. Pretorius (in Nieman, Hough and 
Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:272) categorises four reasons for harvesting – personal reasons, financial 
reasons, failure and outside forces. 

 

The alternative harvest options can be summarised as follows: 

Harvest options 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Outright sale 

Business is sold to a 
willing buyer 

Selling to a firm 
looking for 
acquisitions 

. Potential buyer has information of 
potential of business 
. Owner can negotiate a quick exit 


. Owner is required to stay on 
for a period to train new 
management 
. There could be rumours if the 
deal does not go through 
. New owner might not have 
conceptual grasp of business 


Selling to a 
competitor 

. Prospective client has information 
about the potential of business 
. Owner can make a quick exit 


. There could be rumours in the 
market 
. The owner is at risk when 
there is a structured payment 


Management buyout 

Selling the business to the existing 
management 

. Management already knows the 
business 
. Owner can make a quick exit 
. Payment could be structured over 
a period of time 


. Access to capital is a problem 
. The owner is at risk with a 
structured payment 
. Managers may not be 
entrepreneurial 


Employee share option plan 

Employees take ownership through 
shareholding 

. Ownership for employees may be 
positive for job motivation 
. Owner can be phased out 
. Management can stay on and 
participate in plan 


. Entrepreneurial drive may be 
lost 
. Structuring the deal can be 
complex 
. Share option plans are only for 
relatively large businesses 




 

 


Forming an alliance with another venture 

An interim step that leads to a takeover 
and the owner’s withdrawal after a period 
of time 

. A long-term relationship develops 
. Additional doors may open 
. If the alliance does not work, 
ending the relationship is easy 


. Timing is crucial 
. There is often no legal 
agreement 
. Differing management styles 
may lead to conflict 
. If the alliance does not work, it 
could have a negative impact 
on business 


Harvest options 

Advantages 

Disadvantages 

Merging with another venture (offensive 
merger) 

Formal combination occurs through 
forming a new business or taking up 
shares in each others business 

. Relationship is stronger 
. Merger is more formal and cannot 
be easily reversed 


. A minority owner can be 
somewhat exposed 
. Differing management styles 
may lead to conflict 
. No harvesting occurs until one 
party leaves 


Proceed with a professional manager 

A manager operates the business while 
the owner withdraws 

. Works well when the owner has 
health problems 


. Clashes in management styles 
can occur 
. Owner may feel loss of control 
. There is no ‘big’ harvest 


 

 

Capital cow 

Owner proceeds with business but uses 
cash it generates as capital for 
establishment of another venture 

. Serves as source of capital 
. Offers a different route to 
harvesting 
. It enables exploitation of other 
windows of opportunity 


. Harvesting takes longer 
. There is no ‘big’ harvest 
. The owner cannot leave easily 
. Growth is not possible in the 
existing business 
. Cash withdrawals might lead 
to cash flow problems 


Public offering 

 

. Harvesting is quick and normally 
good 
. Prestige is gained 


. Mostly for big business 
. It is expensive 
. There is loss of control 
. Requires specialist advice and 
experience 




 

 

6.9.2 Alternate harvest options (Pretorius in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:296-
299) 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

6.10. The Life Cycle Stage 




The life cycle stage of the business is of crucial importance to the harvest decision. During the 
incubation or start up stage, there is very little opportunity for harvesting because the business 
venture is conceptual and there is not much to harvest (except an idea or opportunity). 

 

During the start up (infancy) stage, the ability to harvest is not attractive in view of the 
uncertainties of the market demand. This stage is associated with greater risk and potential for 
failure. 

 

The growth stage presents the best opportunity to harvest, based on future potential through 
sale, merger or alliance. The maturity stage is characterised by more competition. Harvesting 
options are driven by a defensive position (sale, merger, alliance). 

 

During the decline stage, the options to harvest decrease drastically and harvesting can occur 
through a defensive merger or selling of assets (Pretorius, in Nieman, Hough and 
Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:294). 

 

Pretorius (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:299) also indicates the principles that 
govern a harvest strategy as: 

. Timing and Patience 
. Vision to plan ahead and Realistic evaluation 
. Contractual agreement and Mentoring agreement 
. Structured deal 


 

Each of these elements can contribute to a better harvest. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 6.1 

READ THE FOLLOWING CASELET AND ANSWER THE QUESTIONS THAT FOLLOW 

The Little Cake Company 

Our Story.... 

 

Once upon a time in a little city called Durban Leanne and Khety started whipping up cupcakes 
for a little spar in Glenashley called, Glenore Kwikspar. 4 years down the road from a little 
kitchen with a little oven to a big factory with some big ovens. The Little Cake Company has 
grown into something quite amazing and because of this we have been able to train and provide 
jobs to the unemployed. We are in the business of doing good business and making a 
difference so let us amaze your taste buds with some of our delicious cupcakes and cakes. The 
Little Cake Company's cupcakes are the perfect little bite that pleasantly surprises the palate 
and delights the eye. We specialise in offering a delicious and tantalising assortment of 
decadent chocolate and vanilla cupcakes freshly home baked with goodness complete 
with elegance for any occasion. 

 

Basic vanilla cupcakes are decorated with handmade sugar craft decorations, lovingly made by 
us. Price is determined by the amount of work involved in making the decorations. You are able 
to have some cupcakes more detailed than others which will make your order more cost 
effective. Eggless cupcakes are available on request. Personal preferences and desires are 
taken into account when creating the perfect cake to compliment your special occasion. There 
is no better way to mark this extra special occasion than by having a luxury custom made cake 
designed exclusively for you. Each cake is the result of detailed discussions with yourself to 
ensure it meets your exact requirements. We will work closely with you, to ensure the cake you 
choose perfectly enhances your special day. Our cakes are baked "fresh to order" with the 
finest quality ingredients and eggless on request. 

(SOURCE: www.littlecakecompany.co.za/) 

 

 

 


 

6.1.1. The Little Cake Company has grown into something quite amazing and because of this 
we have been able to train and provide jobs to the unemployed. Entrepreneurship has 
benefits for the economy, society and the entrepreneur. With reference to this statement 
identify the benefits of entrepreneurship. 






 

6.1.2. Identify and discuss personal characteristics of an entrepreneur by making reference to 
the case study. 






 

6.1.3. Identify and discuss the factors of production that The Little Cake Company needed in 
order to establish The Little Cake Company. 






 

6.1.4. Once upon a time in a little city called Durban, Leanne and Khety started whipping up 
cupcakes for a little spar in Glenashley called, Glenore Kwikspar. With reference to this 
statement, indicate the factors affecting the choice of business enterprise for Leanne and 
Khethy. 






 

6.1.5. Outline and discuss the business management processes that were strategically used by 
the entrepreneurs in the case study. 






 

6.1.6. Outline the expectations of government and society and point out whether The Little 
Cake Company fulfils that expectation. 






 

6.1.7. Conceptualise the importance of aligning business management processes with the 
requirements and expectations of government and society. 






 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ACTIVITY 6.2 

After reading the case study follow construct an argument that considers the importance of 
aligning business process management with the requirements and expectations of government 
and society by paying particular attention to business failure. 

Key Reasons for Business failure 

Start up businesses have a very high failure rate in the United Kingdom with as many as 1 in 2 
failing in their first two years. The reverse side of the coin is that almost half survive and go on 
to prosper. Key reasons for business failure include: 
Poor marketing. 

Successful modern businesses are ones that understand and meet the requirements of their 
customers. Detailed market research is therefore an essential for new businesses, to find out 
details such as the potential size of the market, the extent of competition, as well as consumer 
preferences and tastes. 

Cash flow problems. 

Many businesses struggle through poor cash flow management. It is all very well having a good 
idea and a good product but it is also necessary to be able to meet short term outflows. Many 
businesses try to grow too quickly, and end up borrowing too much money externally, resulting 
in crippling interest repayment charges. 
Poor business planning. 

 A business plan should cover aspects such as marketing, finance, sales and promotional plans, 
as well as detailed breakdowns of costing and profit predictions. It is often said that 'failing to 
plan, is planning to fail'. 
Lack of finance. 

Insufficient finance often means that businesses are unable to take opportunities that are 
available to them, or have to compromise - going for high cost solutions to problems, rather than 
lower cost ones that would yield greater competitive advantage. 
Failure to embrace new technologies and new developments. 

In a fast changing world leading businesses are ones that make best use of advanced modern 
technologies in an appropriate way. Firms that operate with outdated technologies and methods 
frequently find themselves at a cost disadvantage over more dynamic rivals. 
Poor choice of location. 

Location is a very important business decision. A good location is one that appeals to large 
numbers of customers, while at the same time minimising costs. 

 


 

For example in retailing it is often a mistake to choose a low cost location, that is not visible to 
customers. However, conversely there are considerable cost advantages to out-of-town retailers 
that customers are prepared to travel to visit. 
Poor management. 

Weak and inexperienced management is one of the major causes of business failure. Managers 
have to work extremely hard, and to understand their customer’s needs, and the business that 
they are in if they are to be successful. 
Human resource relations 

Poor human resource relations are often a cause of failure. Successful businesses motivate 
their employees to work hard to help the business to succeed. 
Lack of clear objectives 

Successful organisations have clearly focused and communicated objectives that enable 
everyone in the organisation to pull in the same direction. At the turn of the millennium a host of 
new .com businesses were launched in this country based on the hype associated with having 
an 'online presence'. A large number of these businesses were based on good ideas - e.g. 
retailing wine, clothes and financial services on the Internet. However, what many of these 
businesses lacked was an established trade name, which the general public was familiar with. 
The major companies that we are familiar with - Coca-Cola, Cadbury Schweppes, Nestle have 
taken years to build their brand names. Many of the new .coms were seeking to build brand 
awareness very quickly. These companies were able to raise relatively large sums of capital to 
set up. However, advertising and promotional costs were substantial, and the pool of capital 
they started up with rapidly began to run out before they could make the breakthrough to 
profitability. What we then saw was a high level of business failure in 2000 and 2001 among the 
new .coms. Although many of their ideas were good they ran into cash flow problems. In the 
end the prime beneficiaries of the .com revolution were existing companies with well established 
brand names that were able to embrace the new technologies. (Source: www.times100.com) 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


CHAPTER 7: 

ACHIEVING ORGANISATIONAL OBJECTIVES 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s resources and processes to achieve 
organisational objectives. This overall outcome will be achieved through the learner’s mastery of 
the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

1. Identify the company’s resources and processes 

2. Describe organisational objectives. 

3. Identify differences in strategic outlook between small businesses and large organisations 

4. Discuss the strategies available to entrepreneurial ventures 

5. Demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s resources and processes to achieve 
organisational objectives 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

Textbooks: 

 

Venter, Urban and Rwigema (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Eleven 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapters Six and Nineteen 

7.1. Introduction 

Entrepreneurs and managers must demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s resources 
and processes to achieve organisational objectives. This may be achieved through the 
identification of the company’s resources and processes, by further identifying the 
organisational objectives and by isolating the differences in strategic outlook between small 
businesses and large organisations. 

 


 

Entrepreneurs must know the strategies available to entrepreneurial ventures finally they must 
be able to demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s resources and processes to 
achieve organisational objectives. ‘Entrepreneurial’ refers to starting up a venture based on a 
business opportunity. The entrepreneurial phases of the life cycle of a business venture cover 
the pre-start-up, start-up and early growth phases of the cycle. Entrepreneurial strategies thus 
relate more to the circumstances and environment of the small venture in its early life cycle than 
to those found in the managerial phases of late growth, maturity and decline. 

7.2. Strategy 

Strategy is defined as an integrated and co-ordinated set of commitments and actions designed 
to exploit core competencies and gain competitive advantage. Strategy refers to the way in 
which all resources are applied in the business to gain advantage over competitors. The 
resources include finance, human resources and innovation assets, and their application. The 
principles of strategy are as relevant for the small business venture as for larger organisations. 
The key differences between small ventures and large organisations relate to resources, growth 
stage, competitive environment and structure. 

7.3. Strategic issues 

The strategic issues that confront the small venture flow from its differences from large 
organisations and include: 

. Opportunity or threat? – a perceived opportunity can become a threat if it lures the business 
into taking risks greater than it can afford to take. This is referred to as ‘overtrading’. 


 

. Less information available – the small business has less exposure to and contact with 
important sources of information. 


 

. To start-up or acquire? – the issue is whether to start up a new business or acquire an 
existing business. 


 

. Flexibility – small businesses are more flexible than large organisations and can react faster 
to environmental changes and trends. 


 

 


 

7.4. Competitive Advantage 

A business has a competitive advantage whenever it has an edge over rivals in attracting 
customers and defending itself against competitive forces. The positioning of a business relates 
to how the business is perceived (by existing and potential customers) in relation to the 
competition. The most basic competitive advantage is to provide customers with what they 
perceive as superior value, such as: 

. A good product at a low price 
. A superior product that is worth paying extra for 
. A best-value offering that offers a combination of price, features, quality, service or other 
attributes that customers may find attractive. 


 

A sustainable competitive advantage can be found within the list of strengths, competencies 
and capabilities of a business. Some attributes used as competitive advantage include: 

. Control over a resource 
. Patents 
. Access to a distribution channel 
. Contractual agreements 
. Innovative responsiveness 
. Contacts and networks 
. Franchising 
. Location 
. Brand 


 

The five generic competitive strategies available to large organisations in order to position 
themselves relative to the competition (Overall low-cost producer strategy, focused low-cost 
strategy, broad differentiation strategy, focused differentiation strategy and best cost provider 
strategy) are available to small business ventures, but may have limited application value as a 
result of the limited access of small businesses to certain resources. 

 

 


http://m.c.lnkd.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAJMAAAAJDdiNDc4ODNjLWYwN2EtNDE3ZC1hZTBkLWQxOTA3MmVmZDlhNQ.jpg 


7.5. Positioning and Growth Strategies 

The broad positioning and 
growth strategies 
available to the 
entrepreneurial venture 
include: Product 
leadership; Customer 
intimacy; Operational 
excellence and Follower 
(“also ran”) strategy 

 (www.google.com) 

7.5.1. Product leadership 






This is a small venture may develop a new leading positioning if it has patent protection and can 
grow in a short space of time. Product leadership, however, is generally not available to the 
small business because of its general lack of research and development capacity and the 
resources required to sustain the new product development process. 

 

7.5.2. Customer intimacy 






This refers to the development of close relationships with one’s customers by marketing 
activities or becoming involved in customers’ operations. The strategy is successful if the 
customers become dependent on the service(s) supplied to them. 

 

7.5.3. Operational excellence 






This refers to the efficiency with which inputs are converted to outputs. Applying this strategy 
entails directing resources towards infrastructure, equipment and systems. 

 

7.5.4. Follower (“also ran”) strategy 






This is the distinction between the entrepreneur (who comes up with new opportunities and 
growth) and the small business owner (who follows the market). 

 

 

 


 

Positioning 

 

 


POSITIONING 

New market 

Existing 
market 

 

 

Expand to new 
market 

Penetrate 
existing 
market 

Existing 
concepts 

 

 

 

Pursue new 
opportunity in 
new market 

Innovate to 
existing 
market 

 

New concepts 

 

 

 

Sustainable competitive advantage 

 

 Figure 7.5.1. Positioning 

7.6. Strategic Options for Growth 

There are two basic strategic options for growth: 

. Growing the business internally in size (organic growth) – requires expansion through 
increased market share. The options available are 
- penetrating the existing market 
- finding new customers 
- adding new products and services to service existing customers better 
- adding new products and starting to serve new markets 


. Growing the business through the acquisition of additional businesses (external growth) – 
refers to buying related or unrelated ventures in order to enlarge the business operations. 


 

 


A retrenchment strategy is the opposite of a growth strategy – requiring 
certain operations to be scaled down or eliminated. 



Other strategic options are: 

. Stability – a stability strategy is followed when the owner of a venture does not want to grow 
the total operation. Growth requires capital investment. 
. Combination – a combination strategy could be any combination of the growth, retrenchment 
and stability strategies. 


 

POSITIONING 

Strategy approach 

Growth options 

Penetrate 

Expand 

Innovate 

New 

Sustainable competitive advantage 

New 

Product 
leadership 

Customer 
intimacy 

Operational 
excellence 

“Also-ran” 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 7.6.1 Strategic options 

7.7. Positioning and Growth Strategies 

The following issues will influence the choice of an initial strategy for a business venture aimed 
at growth and competitiveness. 

7.7.1. Economies of scale 






Although the small venture does not normally have the resources to establish economies of 
scale early in the life cycle, if any economies of scale can be achieved, the business venture will 
benefit significantly from them. 

 

7.7.2. Learning-curve effects 






Experience-based cost savings occur as a result of staff learning to perform their tasks more 
efficiently and from the debugging of new technology. 

 


 

7.7.3. Linkages 






Interactions with other businesses to co-operate and share costs can benefit small ventures. 

 

7.7.4. Alliances 






Alliances with some of its suppliers, distributors or customers can allow a small venture to 
integrate its operations either forward or backward. In addition, other service providers can be 
used as ‘partners’ in bigger contracts. 

 

7.7.5. Environmental changes 






Environmental issues include customers, suppliers, competitors and intermediaries from the 
market environment of the business venture. In addition are the political, economic, social, 
technological, global and physical factors from the macro environment that govern the market 
environment. 

 

7.8. The life-cycle stage of the venture 

The life-cycle stage of the venture is important to the choice of strategy. 

. Incubation stage (pre-start-up) – during this stage there are few options. The venture is 
conceptual and the positioning that is envisaged is chosen. 
. Start-up stage – focuses on acquiring resources (determined by the positioning and 
strategy chosen), gaining customer awareness and getting the product or service 
distributed. 
. Growth stage – the focus changes towards market expansion, retaining existing 
customers and gaining new customers. 
. Maturity stage – characterised by more and tougher competition, with pressure on the 
price and distribution elements. 
. Decline stage – sales, profitability and future potential decrease rapidly. 


 

During both the maturity and decline stages, it will be necessary for the business venture to 
make some strategic decisions. An opportunity analysis should be done (preferably at the late 
growth phase) to determine what options potentially exist for the business. 

Understanding the impact of positioning on the choice of strategy brings insight to the 
entrepreneur, helping to anticipate, plan and execute a successful strategy and implement it. 

 


 

The chosen strategy must be monitored and adapted accordingly to the changing environment. 

Entrepreneurs can adapt many strategies used by large organisations. However, a key 
difference between the small business venture and larger organisations is the impact of limited 
resources and access to resources, which both restrict the choices available to small business 
ventures. Ideally the venture should first determine its strategy, and then apply its resources to 
support this strategy. Unfortunately, the limitations on resources often force the selection of a 
strategy based on available resources. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png
KFC's Delivery Service expected to double 


 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 7.1 

READ THE EXTRACT AND ANSWER THE QUESTIONS THAT 
FOLLOW 

A recent new national offering by KFC South Africa called KFC Delivery currently sees 42 stores 
delivering KFC in Gauteng, Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Kwazulu-Natal, Limpopo and the 
North West provinces. With its steady footprint growth, one can expect KFC to double its 
offering bringing to total 80 stores in its delivery stable by the end of 2012. The new business 
layer is part of an important long term growth strategy for KFC. The introduction of delivery will 
see customers have Finger Lickin Good KFC more often and more conveniently as well as 
increase employment opportunities as more staff members, such as drivers, are employed to 
deliver within local areas. “The motivation for not outsourcing the delivery portion of the 
business was a simple one. We want to ensure a true KFC experience by directly delivering 
food and by personally being able to control the quality of the food we deliver to our customers,” 
says Keith Warren Managing Director of KFC Africa. With each order freshly prepared and 
transported in heated bag technology that is able to maintain temperatures greater than 60 
degrees for the short period it takes to get to the customer, one can expect a hot serving of 
KFC. KFC Delivery branded vehicles can be seen either in the form of scooter motorbikes or 
cars. “KFC South Africa has taken learning’s and best practice from other global KFC markets 
within the Yum! network and customised the offering accordingly. We find that using scooter 
motorbikes, for example, are a lot easier than cars in highly built up areas. Some of the most 
creative delivery methods I have seen have come from KFC China, where the teams have 
equipped bicycles with baskets, to overcome the high volumes of traffic there to ensure quality 
standards,” concludes Warren. (Source: http://www.kfc.co.za) 

7.1.1. Identify differences in strategic outlook between small businesses and large 
organisations. 
7.1.2. Discuss the strategies available to entrepreneurial ventures. 
7.1.3. Identify the company’s resources, processes and describe organisational objectives. 
7.1.4. Demonstrate the ability to manage the company’s resources and processes to achieve 
organisational objectives. 







http://www.bobsbiltong.co.uk/logos/200x200Pakco%20.jpg 


ACTIVITY 7.2 

READ THE EXTRACT AND ANSWER THE QUESTIONS THAT FOLLOW 

Pakco Pty Limited 1947 – 1980: The Pillay Brothers – Pakkiri Pakkiry Pillay and Soobramoney 
Pakkiry Pillay 

The two Pillay brothers - Pakkiri Pakkiry Pillay 
(Senior) and Soobramoney Pakkiry Pillay (Junior) - 
founded Pakco. The history of Pakco reads like a 
storybook success; right from its humble beginnings in 1942 to its current position, a South 
African market leader of manufactured spices and bottled pickles. The name Pakco was coined 
by joining the initials of the elder founder Pakkiri and Kaveri (his wife) and adding ‘co’ (company) 
to it. Pakco was, and still is, one of the prominent landmarks in Verulam. 

The Pillay brothers were born and grew up in Clairwood, Durban. In 1942, whilst in their thirty’s, 
the Pillay brothers experimented, creating different spices, pickles and chutneys in their kitchen. 
Samples were tasted and reviewed by neighbours, friends and relatives. They received 
overwhelming comments about their foods. Five years later, the Pillay’s sold their home in 
Durban and moved with their young families to Verulam with the intention of buying land and 
building a spice and pickle factory on a plot in Garland Street in Temple Valley, Verulam. The 
Pillay brothers faced many challenges from the Verulam Town Board, which at that time did not 
agree to grant a licence for the building of the factory. This did not deter the Pillay brothers who 
took the matter to the Durban High Court and were successful in attaining the license. Pakco 
was officially opened in 1948. 

On the completion of the factory, the operations started with packing of pickles and whole 
spices, which were roasted and then ground. Pakco Roasted Masala and Pakco Pickles 
became household names. Also manufactured, at a later stage, were syrups, squashes, jams, 
sweet coconut crunchies and peanut brittle, which sold very quickly. 

At the heart of all Pakco recipes was the Production Director, Mr. S.P Pillay (Junior), whose 
creativity for cooking up new recipes was a recipe for success. Pakco boasted a very modern 
and fully equipped laboratory, which strengthened Pakco’ s research and development 
department as well as the close links with the South African Bureau of Standards, which 
conducted a daily inspection of the factory during production. 

 


 

 Each Pakco can carries a SABS mark – an indication that it is consistently manufactured in 
accordance with SABS standards. The factory, which covers 1800 square metres, was specially 
designed to provide a smooth workflow, from production to distribution, and the entire building 
met rigid hygiene specifications essential for a food company. In 1955 the Pillay brothers 
experimented with canned food, and pioneered South Africa’s first pre-cooked canned curried 
foods. Some of the products included mutton breyani, mutton and kidney beans, and chicken 
breyani. Under the guidance of the Production Director, Mr. S. P. Pillay (Junior), the public’s 
demand for Pakco products boomed and the business thrived. Simultaneously, Mr. P.P Pillay 
(Senior) travelled extensively to keep abreast with developments in the canned food trade 
internationally. 

Marketing of Pakco products was a critical success factor in growing the business. Sales 
representatives were employed to take orders at the Durban morning market stalls, tearooms, 
shops and business houses. There was a huge demand for these products and as a result 
Pakco became very popular in a short space of time. Shorty thereafter, Mr. AR Naidoo was 
appointed as the Marketing Director who promoted Pakco products on a national and 
international level. 

Pakco provided employment to hundreds of people in the Verulam and surrounding areas. Mr. 
P.P Pillay (Senior), Managing Director of the Company, grew the company from its humble 
beginnings of 20 employees. As the business grew, further investments were made in 
expanding Pakco’ s production capacity. This expansion also included further automation and 
improvements in the manufacturing process. 

In 1961, at the Royal Agricultural Show in Pietermaritzburg, Pakco won a ‘Gold Medal 
Certificate” for its Canned Mutton Breyani. Customers were in awe of the innovative creation 
leading to the product being a public favourite. Pakco products could be found on the shelves of 
a number of overseas food stores. Its popularity also resulted in its canned foods being served 
in-flight by international airlines. Pakco has undoubtedly excelled in the food industry having 
won many accolades locally, nationally and internationally. 

Pakco was established during one of the most difficult and challenging times within the South 
African environment. The business developed during the Apartheid regime and as such the 
Pillay brothers faced a number of obstacles on their journey. There can be no doubt that despite 
all of these challenges, they were able to overcome these obstacles through their hard work, 
patience and determination to succeed. 


It is apt that adorning the factory office wall hung a frame with words, which read, “Everyone has 
big ideas, but the one who masters the details can translate the idea into reality.” The Pillay 
brothers, in their 70’s retired from the business in December 1980. 

(Researched by Mrs. Maggie Pillay- Achary for inclusion in a brochure on the History of Verulam 
2016) 

PAKCO ARE RENOWNED FOR THEIR DELIVERY OF FLAVOUR THROUGH THEIR FOOD-
ENHANCING PRODUCT LINES 

Writer Emily Jarvis 
Project manager James Mitchell 

As a world class food manufacturer with proudly South African roots, Pakco has been adding 
flavour and quality to consumers’ lives since 1948 and is a market leader in the manufacture of 
spices, condiments, instant meals and complementary products. The company manufactures 9 
brands, represented in more than 10 categories in-store. Pakco’ s family of brands is renowned 
for reliability, ease of use, and a well-loved, home cooked taste. Through ongoing research and 
product development, Pakco ensures that the latest international technology and trends are 
combined with local insights to keep products relevant and in high demand. 

Pakco (Pty) Ltd. is wholly owned by Renaissance Brands (Pty) Ltd. Recently, after extensive 
negotiations, the Land Bank has joined as a 50% shareholder of Renaissance Brands (Pty) Ltd. 
The value in such a powerful banking partner is self-evident as Mr King cites: “There are 
benefits in having a big financial partner; this will facilitate rapid expansion, both organically and 
by acquisition.” Pakco is located in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal, which is home to one of Africa’s 
busiest ports and where founder, Pakkiri Pillay, bottled his first batch of spiced pickle over 60 
years ago. The group manufactures packs and distributes staple, dry-packed, and tinned foods, 
both branded and private label. 

 

BBBEE Standards 
Pakco is committed to sustainable growth and development and the business meets South 
African Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment (BBBEE) standards. As a community 
sensitive organisation, socio-economic development in line with national imperatives is a priority 
and the business is structured to assist previously disadvantaged groups and individuals while 
simultaneously improving its economic viability. 

 

 

 


 

South African Markets 
All four manufacturing facilities were either rebuilt or refurbished in 2008 and 2009, resulting in a 
globally competitive manufacturing operation, certified by the South African Department of 
Health and accredited by FSSC to global food safety standards. Pakco currently has an 
established market in the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region, and is in 
the process of moving into Eastern and Western Africa. More recently the company has 
launched a global strategy starting in the Gulf and parts of Europe. This has been enabled by 
the achievement of global food safety accreditation. 

The South African market is not growing at a rate that is comfortable. There is a trend towards 
convenience foods on one end, but also towards cost savings and commoditisation on the 
other. “Due to the change in lifestyle, people are searching for convenience, while at the same 
time looking for something that is affordable. Consumers tend to buy in bulk at the end of the 
month, to enjoy the discounts associated with this, but are looking to purchase smaller product 
sizes during the month, as this allows the consumer to buy products they enjoy, at a price that 
they can afford. Catering to these needs of the consumer is imperative to our success,” King 
affirms. 

 

Challenges 
In the sophisticated and highly competitive SA FMCG Food Industry expansion is a challenge, 
hence Pakco’ s move into the African and global markets. The global recession has put a lot of 
pressure on the retail industry in general, both in terms of sales and margins. In South Africa, 
global food safety has gained momentum over the last 5 – 10 years and has driven the smaller 
players out of the market. This has opened up opportunities. 

 

Voted Number one Sauce Choice in SA 
Pakco scooped ‘Product of the Year’, one of the FMCG industry’s most prestigious recognitions, 
in the 2014 Product of the Year Awards for Pakco Sauces; voted the country’s number one 
sauce choice by South African consumers. Product of the Year is the world’s largest consumer-
voted award for product innovation. Established in France 25 years ago, Product of the Year 
currently operates in 28 countries. In South Africa, the Product of the Year seal is backed by the 
votes of 5000 consumers and has a significant influence in assisting future customers in their 
purchase decisions. 

 

 


 

“For manufacturers of the winning products, the award is a powerful marketing message, proven 
to increase product trial, awareness, distribution and sales,” explains Mr King. Pakco has 
launched a number of successful new products already this year, including extensions to their 
Curry Made Easy cook-in sauce, Bisto cook in sauce variants, a Bisto canister as well as an 
extension to Southern Coatings in the form of Southern Crumbs. 

 

The Glamorous Side to the Food Industry 
With the rise of popular television shows such as MasterChef South Africa, Come Dine with Me 

 and Top Chef, there is now a major trend in the food industry. This has encouraged business 

because cooking has now become part of the entertainment, whereas before, it was just the 
finished meal that provided entertainment. King explains how Pakco is benefitting from this 
trend: “Pakco creates spices and ingredients that allow people to become master chefs in their 
own kitchen. In addition to this, there is a long standing trend that has moved the Western world 
to a stronger taste profile, which is evident in the UK, as tikka chicken has over taken fish and 
chips as the number one selling fast food option.” This puts Pakco in an advantageous position 
as this highlights spices and products that Pakco is most well known for, and more and more 
people want to try these types of dishes. 

 

Secret Recipe to Success 
Pakco is the only pickle manufacturer that uses a natural fermentation process in making its 
pickles; it is why they taste so much better than any other product on the market. “The recipes 
are decades old and we do not want to change this, as we want to maintain the high standards 
of quality our consumers have come to know and trust,” remarks King. “We’ve maintained 
recipes using real vegetables cooked/ fermented in the traditional ways,” King emphasis. With a 
plan to move into Africa, The Gulf and Europe, as well as continually offer new and innovative 
products to their consumers, Pakco remain at the top of the flavouring game. 

 

Market Penetration 

Pakco is well equipped to produce products catering to the specific needs and tastes of different 
regions and cultures, providing unique flavour experiences while maintaining excellent quality. 
Pakco products are synonymous with quality and value in Southern Africa and the business has 
excellent relationships in the FMCG industry, built on more than 60 years as a key player in 
local markets. 

 


 

The Pakco range is supported in both manufacture and distribution sectors by all major catering, 
hospitality and food service providers. The company boasts 100% market penetration in South 
Africa and its products are stocked in all major retailers, wholesalers, and independent stores 
nationwide. The footprint has broadened and now features 95% market penetration in the 
SADC region, with a high level of interest being expressed throughout Africa and as far afield as 
Australia, Europe, USA and Canada. A dedicated team focuses on the development of export 
opportunities, business to business expansions and unlocking new markets. Connecting 

customers with Pakco products efficiently, timeously and cost-effectively is of the utmost 
importance. Distribution is a vital component of the FMCG industry and is inseparable from 
Pakco’ s success. The organisation has selected key industry players and developed close 
partnerships to ensure that more than 20 000 cases reach SADC warehouses each week. TFD 
Network Africa, Pakco’ s Southern African partner of choice, has warehouses in strategic 
locations around South Africa and a network of agents for distribution to other countries. To 
ensure stock availability, Pakco also delivers directly ex-factory to customers who purchase full 
container loads. 

 

Land, Sea and Air 

Pakco’ s vast distribution network uses road freight extensively in transporting goods to SADC 
regions. PAKCO is located within 30 minutes of both the King Shaka International Airport and 
the Durban Harbour, one of Africa’s largest ports. 

 

World class manufacturing 

The Pakco plant boasts four state-of-the-art factory facilities. The plant currently operates at 
100% single shift capacity, which can be doubled without further capex requirements. Pakco 
has the infrastructure, capacity and manpower to produce additional output for increased orders 
and new product lines, which opens up opportunities to develop strategic partnerships and 
licensing agreements that optimise the plant’s potential. 

 

PAKCO’s Much Loved Family of Brands 

There are decades of heritage and tradition in each of the brands, with strong roots deeply 
embedded in South African food culture. For over 60 years, the brands have been trusted to 
deliver unique tastes and flavours adding that ‘special something’ to mealtimes. From Indian 
curries to Traditional African sishebos, from English Sunday roasts to American style chicken, 
from starters to main meals to desserts……Pakco has a flavour to suit every palate! 


 

Recognition: 2013 ECR House & Garden Show Gold Award 

Pakco was presented with a Gold Award for its stand display at the East Cost Radio & Garden 
Show in 2013. Exhibitors were judged on their displays, crowd interaction and popularity of the 
products sampled. 

 

Pakco was a finalist in the 2013 Gold Pack Awards for the new packaging on its range of 
sauces. 

The need for a packaging update was identified and new designs were inspired by the sauces’ 
unique flavours, their delicate blend of spices, quality ingredients, and Pakco ’s tradition of 
quality. The result was a fresh, new “Authentically Indian” look and feel that looks as good as its 
contents taste, with square bottles and vibrant colours that are very much on-trend. 

 

7.2.1. Identify Pakco’s resources and processes 

7.2.2. Isolate Pakco’s organisational objectives. 

7.2.3. Identify differences in strategic outlook between small businesses and large organisations 
by comparing Pakco with other organisations. 

7.2.4. Discuss the strategies that were and still are available to Pakco as an entrepreneurial 
venture. 

7.2.5. Demonstrate the ability of Pakco to manage its resources and processes to achieve 
organisational objectives. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


CHAPTER 8 

COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE 

 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding how the integration of entrepreneurial processes enhances 
organisational performance. This overall outcome will be achieved through the learner’s mastery 
of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able to: 

 

1. Discuss the process of opportunity identification. 
2. Describe the gathering of resources. 
3. Discuss the establishment and management of ventures in achieving competitive 
advantage. 




 

 

 

ESSENTIAL READING 

Learners are required to read ALL of the textbook chapters listed below. 

 

Venter, Urban and Rwigema. (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Five 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter Four 

8.1. Introduction 




The entrepreneur must be able to demonstrate a broad understanding how the integration of 
entrepreneurial processes enhances organisational performance. This may be achieved through 
the mastery being able to understand the process of opportunity identification, by being able to 
comprehend the gathering of resources and understanding the establishment and management 
of ventures in achieving organisational objectives. 

 


 

8.2. Opportunity identification: Finding the Right Opportunity 




Greg Fisher says that finding the right entrepreneurial opportunity depends on two important 
questions to ask: Is there a gap in the market? And am I the right person to fill the gap? 

8.2.1. Market demand 






The starting point for sourcing an opportunity is to look for a gap in a market. By becoming 
aware of people’s under-served needs, on can develop an opportunity-oriented mindset. In 
order to foster this mindset, it is useful to engage in these practices: 

. Observe – look for people who are under-served 
. Write – keep an “ideas” notebook; write down business thoughts and ideas, reflect on them, 
eliminate bad ideas, link ideas with potential and build on good ideas 
. Discuss – engage in exploratory chats with other people. 
. Explore – explore trends and concepts 


Effectively combining these practices will provide a diverse set of ideas which must be refined 
and researched. The research should attempt to gauge: 

. The size of the market – how big is the market and is there room for another competitor? 
. The likely competitors in the market – who are the competitors and how is the idea different 
from what they do? 
. Is it possible to reach the customer? – how to get to the customer to sell and distribute the 
product or service. 


 

This quick market research will indicate whether or not there is a gap in the market. 

8.2.2. Passion 






Building a business around an activity or product about which you are passionate can give a 
huge advantage. Passion increases the ability and confidence to sell it to others. Passion also 
makes it easier to endure the tough times of building a business. 

8.2.3. Skills 






Using unique skills that have developed during one’s lifetime can give a competitive advantage 
in setting up a business. 

 


 

8.2.4. Resources 






As ideas are reviewed, consideration must be given to the available resources that will provide a 
head start when implementing the idea. Effective entrepreneurs leverage the opportunities that 
arise from the resources they have access to. 

(Source: ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE JUNE 2006 ISSUE) 

8.3. Opportunity identification 




One way to identify opportunity is to know how existing entrepreneurs identified the opportunity 
and set up their enterprises. An investigation into the historical experiences of small enterprises 
in India, in this regard reveals some interesting factors. The entrepreneurs selected their 
products or projects based on: 

. Their own or partners’ past experience in that business line; 
. The government’s promotional schemes and facilities offered to run some specific 
business enterprises; 
. The high profitability of products; which indicate increasing demand for them in the 
market; 
. The availability of inputs like raw materials, labour, etc. at cheaper rates; 
. The expansion or diversification plans of their own or any other ongoing business known 
to them; 
. The products reserved for small-scale units or certain locations. 


After having gained some idea on how the existing entrepreneurs selected products/projects, 
the intending entrepreneur can find a way out of the tangle of which opportunity/product/project 
to select to finally pursue as one’s business enterprise. 

One of the ways employed by most of the intending entrepreneurs to select a suitable 
product/project is to firstly generate ideas about a few products/ projects. Accordingly, what 
follows next is a discussion idea generation about products. 


 

8.4. Idea Generation 

 

In a sense, opportunity identification and selection are akin to, what is termed, ‘new product 
development.’ 

 

8.4.1. Sources of Ideas 

Product or opportunity identification and selection process starts with the generation of ideas, or 
say, ideas about some opportunities or products are generated in the first instance. The ideas 
about opportunities or products that the entrepreneur can consider for selecting the most 
promising one to be pursued by him/her as an enterprise, can be generated or discovered from 
various sources- both internal and external. These may include: 

. Knowledge of potential customer needs, 
. Watching emerging trends in demands for certain products, 
. Scope for producing substitute product, 
. Going through certain professional magazines catering to specific interests like 
electronics, computers, etc. 
. Success stories of known entrepreneurs or friends or relatives, 
. Making visits to trade fairs and exhibitions displaying new products and services, 
. Meeting with the Government agencies, 
. Ideas given by the knowledgeable persons, 
. Knowledge about the Government policy, concessions and incentives, list of items 
reserved for exclusive manufacture in small-scale sector, 
. A new product introduced by the competitor, and 
. One’s market insights through observation. 


 

In nutshell, a prospective entrepreneur can get ideas for establishing his/ her enterprise from 
various sources. These may include consumers, existing products and services presently on 
offer, distribution channels, the government officials, and research and development. 

 

 


 

8.4.2. Consumers 

No business enterprise can be thought of without consumers. Consumers demand for products 
and services to satisfy their wants. Also, consumers’ wants in terms of preferences, tastes and 
liking keep on changing. Hence, an entrepreneur needs to know what the consumers actually 
want so that he/she can offer the product or service accordingly. 

Consumers’ wants can be known through their feedback about the products and services they 
have been using and would want to use in future. 

8.4.3. Existing Products and Services 

One way to have an enterprise idea may be to monitor the existing products and services 
already available in the market and make a competitive analysis of them to identify their 
shortcomings and then, based on it, decide what and how a better product and service can be 
offered to the consumers. Many enterprises are established mainly to offer better products and 
services over the existing ones. 

8.4.4. Distribution Channels 

Distribution channels called, market intermediaries, also serves as a very effective source for 
new ideas for entrepreneurs. The reason is that they ultimately deal with the ultimate consumers 
and, hence, better know the consumers’ wants. As such, the channel members such as 
wholesalers and retailers can provide ideas for new product development and modification in 
the existing product. For example, an entrepreneur came to know from a salesman in a 
departmental store that the reason his hosiery was not selling was its dark shade while most of 
the young customers want hosiery with light shade. 

The entrepreneur paid heed to this feedback and accordingly changed the shade of his hosiery 
to light shade. The entrepreneur found his hosiery enjoying increasing demand just within a 
month. 

8.4.5. Government 

At times, the Government can also be a source of new product ideas in various ways. For 
example, government from time to time issues regulations on product production and 
consumption. Many a times, these regulations become excellent sources for new ideas for 
enterprise formation. 


 

For example, government’s regulations on ban on polythene bags have given new idea to 
manufacture jute bags for marketing convenience of the sellers and buyers. A prospective 
entrepreneur can also get enterprise idea from the publications of patents available for license 
or sale. Besides, there are some governmental agencies that assist entrepreneurs in obtaining 
specific product information. Such information can also become basis for enterprise formation. 

8.4.6. Research and Development 

The last but no means the least source of new ideas is research and development (R&D) 
activity. R&D can be carried out in-house or outside the organisation. R&D activity suggests 
what and how a new or modified product can be produced to meet the customers’ requirements. 
Available evidences indicate that many new product development, or say, new enterprise 
establishments have been the outcome of R&D activity. For example, one research scientist in a 
Fortune 500 company developed a new plastic resin that became the basis of a new product, a 
plastic molded modular cup pallet. Most of the product diversifications have stemmed from the 
organisation’s R&D activity. 

8.4.7. Methods of Generating Ideas 

As seen above, there could be variety of sources available to generate ideas for enterprise 
formation. But, even after generating ideas to convert these into enterprise is still a problem for 
the prospective entrepreneur. The reason is not difficult to seek. This involves a process 
including first generating the ideas and then scrutinising of the ideas generated to come up with 
an idea to serve as the basis for a new enterprise formation. The entrepreneur can use several 
methods to generate new ideas. However, the most commonly used methods of generating 
ideas are: focus groups, brainstorming, and problem inventory analysis. 

8.4.8. Focus Groups 

A group called ‘focus group’ consisting of 6-12 members belonging to various socio-economic 
backgrounds are formed to focus on some particular matter like new product idea. The focus 
group is facilitated by a moderator to have an open in-depth discussion. The mode of the 
discussion of the group can be in either a directive or a non-directive manner. The comment 
from other members is supplied with an objective to stimulate group discussion and 
conceptualise and develop new product idea to meet the market requirement. While focusing on 
particular matter, the focus group not only generates new ideas, but screens the ideas also to 
come up with the most excellent idea to be pursued as a venture. 


 

8.4.9. Brainstorming 

Brainstorming technique was originally adopted by Alex Osborn in 1938 in an American 
Company for encouraging creative thinking in groups of six to eight people. According to 
Osborn, brainstorming means using the brain to storm the issue/problem. Brainstorming 
ultimately boils down to generate a number of ideas to be considered for the dealing with the 
issue/problem. However, brainstorming exercise to be effective needs to follow a modus 
operandi involving four basic guidelines: 

. Generate as many ideas as possible. 
. Be creative, freewheeling, and imaginative. 
. Build upon piggyback, extend, or combine earlier ideas. 
. Withhold criticism of others’ ideas. 


There are two principles that underlie brainstorming. One is differed judgment, by which all 
ideas are encouraged without criticism and evaluation. The second principle is that quantity 
breeds quality. The brainstorming session to be effective needs to work like a fun, free from any 
type of compulsions and pressures. 

Each member needs to have willingness and capacity to listen to others’ thoughts, to use these 
thoughts as a stimulus to spark new ideas of their own, and then feel free to express them. As 
such, efforts are made to keep the brainstorming session free from any sort of dominance and 
obstruction derailing and inhibiting discussion to proceed in a desired manner to serve its 
purpose. A normal brainstorming session lasts for from ten minutes to one hour and does not 
require much preparation. 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

Read the article below and report on how start-up entrepreneurship ventures can become 
successful. 

The state of start-up entrepreneurship for Africa in the 21st century 

7 April 2016 by Wendy Van Schalkwyk 

The market recession of 2007 created serious challenges by insufficiently providing jobs for 
people entering and leaving the formal job market due to retrenchments and slow market 
growth. While Africa’s rate of growth has outperformed the global rate over the last decade, 
growth remains insufficient to provide jobs. The African Economic Outlook (2015) estimates 200 
million people between the ages of 15 and 24 in Africa. This is the youngest population in the 
world and population growth remains rapid. The number of young people in Africa will double by 
2045 and in 2050, 70% of the world’s population will come from Africa. Between 2000 and 
2008, Africa’s working age population (15-64 years) grew from 443 million to 550 million, an 
increase of 25%. Left unattended, this will have serious economic and political repercussions, 
potentially resulting in large scale civil unrest and potential wars. 

A McKinsey and Company Report (2011) provides insights into the growing demand for 
entrepreneurship to drive the global economy. With 12% of working age population engaged in 
early stage development of entrepreneurship and SME’s accounting for 52% of the Global 
Domestic Product (GDP), the outlook for entrepreneurship looks positive, but statistics reveal 
that 90% of start-up entrepreneurs fail within the first two - three years of business mainly due to 
a poor mind-set, lack of effective business and funding models. 
So how can government support the growth and development of start-up entrepreneurs? 
McKinsey’s highlights that the root cause lies in the early stage development of SMME’s, how 
they are enabled, created and sustained through their business lifecycle. Their report indicates 
the various factors impacting the entrepreneur and their success. 


 

While the definition of entrepreneurship has changed significantly since it being defined in the 
16th century, the purpose for entrepreneurship remains consistent, presenting the economic 
motivation and value creation drivers for entrepreneurs. Respected global strategy academic 
authors agree that start-up entrepreneurship is critical to national economies as it contributes to 
job creation, productivity and economic growth. Interestingly, Chakravorti (2015) states while the 
mature world and business struggles through recession and recovery, 75% of the growth of 
global output will come from the emerging markets, pointing to nibble, fast paced and agile start-
up entrepreneurs who can develop bottom up strategies and emerge as winners overnight. 
Six centuries later, entrepreneurship has become a global phenomenon, spanning micro-
entrepreneurs to visionary individuals creating global companies in less than ten years. The 
Global Entrepreneurial Monitor, GEM (2006) which tracks the Total Early Stage Entrepreneurial 
Activity (TEA) reveals the average rate (per 100) adults engaged in business start-ups is 9.43%. 
Interestingly, the average increases when developing countries are grouped together and 
includes the countries of Peru (40.15%), the Philippines (44%), Thailand (15.20%), Brazil 
(11.65%), India (10.42%) and Chile (9.14%). Locally, by comparison, South Africa rated a mere 
average of 5.29%. Eight years later in 2014, the Total Early Stage Entrepreneurial activity 
statistics have shown positive increases in both developed and developing countries. 

 Factors for entrepreneurial start-up success 

Forbes Online, January 2015, points to successful factors for start-up entrepreneurs and 
statistics reveal that globally only a mere 10% of start-up entrepreneurs succeed and those that 
do include the following factors: 

1. The supply of market relevant products and services 
2. Good leadership 
3. Market pull 
4. Team tenacity 

Similarly, The Allan Gray Orbis Foundation (2014) commented on the 5th Global Economic 
Symposium (GES), in Morocco, themed “Harnessing the Power of Technology for Innovation 
and Entrepreneurship” that for entrepreneurship to succeed start-up entrepreneurs must – 

 

 


 

1. Prove their business concept as soon as possible 
2. Build reputation and credibility fast 
3. Work on securing customers as soon as possible 

Interestingly, this is contrary to the Global Economic Monitor (2014) which focuses more on 
business and finance models and leadership, revealing the levels of complexity, varied 
perspectives and opinions on what exactly constitutes the factors for start-up success. 

On closer inspection, van Schalkwyk reveals that they are in fact saying the same things but in 
different form. ‘It’s about semantics’ she says ‘and building bridges of understanding and 
communication in the simplest form in order to share the wisdom and valuable insights with 
start-up entrepreneurs, as complexity can be seen as simple to some, simplicity can be seen as 
complex to others. Building a culture of good, able and responsible leaders, with good ethics 
and compassion to influence and achieve a common vision, goal and understanding between 
stakeholders is becoming more and more critical to motivating, stimulating and mobilising the 
change and actions needed to muster positive economic growth. In the 21st Century 
entrepreneurs must therefore become positive key drivers for the value creation of a better 
world, which directly impacts and determines the society and environment in which we live and 
will operate in, with power to inform a new paradigm of existence.’ 

According to McKinsey (2011), the 21st century belongs to the entrepreneur and underpinned 
by three pillars of success i.e. their ecosystem (or market environment), financing and culture. 
Countries that outperform their peers in these three areas collectively will succeed in 
entrepreneurship. This explains why entrepreneurs in developed countries experience higher 
success. 
Similarly, The Global Entrepreneurial Monitor (2014) cites a country’s national economic 
framework as a factor for entrepreneurial success. It highlights that the success of 
entrepreneurship is directly linked to its local economic framework. It states three major 
motivating factors for entrepreneurship within countries and this is linked to the value drivers of 
the country’s economy such as factor driven economies, efficiency driven economies and 
innovation driven economies. The GEM 2014 report advocates The Entrepreneurial Framework 
Conditions (EFC), playing a significant role in solving the challenges for entrepreneurs, but still 
requires the entrepreneur to do the right actions to achieve the right results, profits and 
outcomes, confirming that actions are key to growth, development and success. 


 

The report shows how developed countries are set up for success while developing economies 
struggle with challenges and obstacles that hinder their growth and development. As an 
example of this is the fact that the South African government launched their first handbook for 
entrepreneurial incubators, sponsored by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 
twenty years later when compared to developed economies. 

For South Africa, the incubator support programme aims to assists SMME entrepreneurs in the 
start-up phase with support and services that will enable their growth and development, offering 
incentives for investment and support initiatives, but business models and methods are 
changing rapidly, fuelled by e-commerce and disruptive technology innovations. 

 

According to respected academics, third world countries have caught up with first world 
countries on securing future trade agreements and protecting their markets. Initiatives such as 
BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) for developing countries are examples of 
such trade and market protection initiatives and real global alliances which influence purchasing 
and sales agreements between business and state. These powerful trade agreements will have 
a direct impact on entrepreneurship opportunities that will direct and leverage business trade 
partner agreements and growth into the future. 
(www.entrepreneurship.co.za) 

 

8.5. Illustrative sources of generation of business ideas 




The following are some examples of sources of generation of business ideas. 

. In India, service class people find it inconvenient to take milk pots with them to the office 
as well as they need to buy milk while coming back from the office in the evening, 
therefore to provide milk in sachets or tetra packs became a new business idea. 
. Having difficulty in finding accommodation and transport facility while on visits to a 
new/tourist places may give one an idea to start a travel agency providing complete 
package of facilities to the visitors to these new / tourist places. 
. Knowing that many people have hobbies or even develop a passion for gardening may 
give rise to an idea of setting up one’s own nursery. 


 


 

. An idea may be created to produce the local item as an souvenir. 
. Recognising the increasing application of computers in offices as well as business 
organisations, irrespective of its size, may give an idea to set-up a computer-training 
centre. 


 Once ideas have being generated following the above process, the next step comes is 
identification of above generated ideas as opportunities or product identification. After going 
through above process, one might have been able to generate some ideas that can be 
considered to be pursued as ones business enterprise. 

 

 

 Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

8.6. Strategies for opportunity identification 

1. Understand the role of creative thinking and behavior as entrepreneurs discover and refine 
entrepreneurial opportunities 

2. Know the three strategies for innovation available to entrepreneurs and enhance the 
entrepreneurial mind-set necessary to recognise opportunities 

3. Use the model of opportunity identification, including scanning the environment; discovering 
needs, problems, and opportunities in the industry and marketplace; and generating ideas for 
new products, services, technologies, and processes 

4. Learn the sources of ideas and opportunities for new ventures, conduct the opportunity 
SEARCH process for idea generation and build an entrepreneurial culture that supports 
creativity and innovation. 

 

 


 

Thinkpoint 

 

 

 

 

 

Read the case study below and answer the questions that follow. 

THE HONEY BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 

The Honey business opportunity has been embraced by thousands of people who have built 
their own successful and meaningful businesses. The major strength of Honey has always been 
the entrepreneurial qualities and enthusiasm of our Team Leaders and Sales Consultants 
(Distributors). People from all walks of life, who share values of commitment, focus and a desire 
to succeed, have been drawn to the Honey opportunity. Honey values and promotes a winning 
culture of self-actualisation, interdependence, integrity, excellence, sharing and of course, lots 
of fun! 

 Honey is great for people who do not necessarily have professional sales or business skills. 

Why? The product sells itself…. Honey provides free training….Superb management support. 

Excellent rewards & recognition….Honey is a zero risk business opportunity. 

The Honey Business Opportunity has enhanced their lifestyles by enabling them to fulfil their 
personal goals. Having their own business has ensured financial freedom and flexibility in terms 
of family, personal career commitments and growth and development. (Source: 
honeyacc.co.za/) 

1. The major strength of Honey has always been the entrepreneurial qualities and 
enthusiasm of our Team Leaders and Sales Consultants (Distributors).With reference to 
this statement, evaluate any three reasons why businesses such as HONEY survive and 
prosper. 
2. The Honey Business Opportunity has enhanced their lifestyles by enabling them to fulfil 
their personal goals. Having their own business has ensured financial freedom and 
flexibility in terms of family, personal career commitments and growth and development. 
With reference to this statement, critically discuss the challenges facing HONEY as a 
small business. 







http://4vector.com/i/free-vector-person-reading-book-clip-art_125454_person-reading-book-clip-art/Person_Reading_Book_clip_art_hight.png 


 

 

QUESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

ACTIVITY 8.1 

Read the case study and answer the questions that follow. 

Know your own True North 

At 36 Carlo Gonzaga is head of a rapidly expanding franchise group that promises to become 
one of the giants of the sector. Taste Holdings, consists of 125 Scooters pizza outlets, 70 Maxi’s 
and 80 NWJ stores. In 2007 Taste Holdings was listed on the AltX. And Maxi’s won franchisor of 
the year award in 2010. Carlo Gonzaga, CEO of Taste Holdings, does not believe that trying to 
build the biggest company of its kind is the wisest goal. “Size can be dangerous.” He says, “Our 
core aim must always be that our franchisees must always be profitable.” 

 

Carlo sees his responsibilities as going far beyond his franchisees. “If we are remembered at all, 
I hope it will be for the opportunities we gave people to change their lives. That applies 

fundamentally to our franchisees, but also to their staff, suppliers, shareholders, stakeholders 
and investors. 

 

To Gonzaga, there are two fundamental qualities a business leader must possess: 

He must have great strategic clarity so he knows where he is taking his business. 

He must also have clear and unambiguous values. 

Especially since our listing, how easy it is to stray into grey moral areas. If I started accepting 
gifts from suppliers, I could hardly be surprised to find that my managers were doing the same. 

Unless you know your own true north, you may lead your company down a path to long term 
disaster. The group’s strategy is to become a diversified franchise holding company and expand 
their portfolio of brands; using the skills they have developed to grow their brands. The 
implementation of this strategy has led to the acquisition of the Natal Wholesalers Jewelers 
(NWJ) chain, a move that many in the sector felt was a miscalculation. 

 


“What do the Gonzaga’s think they know about jewellery?” was the question that was being in 
the media and by opposition businesses. Strangely, it was the same question that was being 
asked when they acquired Maxi’s: “what do they know about sit down restaurants?” Gonzaga 
contends: “the point is that the challenges facing all our brands are the same. The consumers 
are similar, the systems used are similar and all three brands fall into a common strategy.” He 
says, “So often people seem to feel that if something doesn’t fit into an existing box it must be 
wrong.” 

 

The Taste Holdings story started with pizza. Scooters Pizza was the original brand and is 
comfortably the group’s biggest. Then Taste Holdings came into existence when Maxi’s was 
acquired. But it was back in 1996, before Scooters Pizza had been thought of, that Gonzaga’s 
parents bought a Debonairs Pizza outlet. He was in university at that time but worked in the 
business whenever he got the chance- and loved it. It was as a franchise that he had his first 
lessons in managing people. By the time they sold four years later, they had four outlets and 
were employing 60 people. The young Carlo, who was only 26 years old at the time had a 25% 
stake in the business, had profited to the tune of R700 000 and was ready to strike out on his 
own. His period as a franchisee was not his first step as an entrepreneur. At university, while 
studying for a law degree, he was given the student fund raising portfolio. His approach was 
unusual by any standards. 

 He created a bar in the law faculty that sold drinks to both students and faculty members. It 
even had an intercom system from the lecture hall to the bar, so that students could sit in the 
bar and follow the lecture from there. He gave it the suitably legalistic name, “The Side Bar”. 
Carlo freely admits he has profited from the knowledge of many wise people. The first person I 

 

 hired was wrong for the job and I paid him twice what I should have. It was all part of my 
business education. To Gonzaga humility is a vital aspect of leadership. The entrepreneur who 
thinks he knows it all is a liability to himself and his business. When he started Scooters Pizza, 
he looked for an alliance partner and found it in Nando’s. After just two meetings, Nando’s liked 
what we had put in place and decided to take a stake in the new company. The Nando’s model 
has had a formative influence on the company and one we always tried to replicate.” 

 

With the formation of Taste Holdings and the added diversification that came first with Maxi’s 
and then NWJ, Gonzaga felt compelled to step aside consciously from operating activities. “I 
had to change my thinking’” he says “In Scooters where we began with one single store, I was 
involved in every decision of any importance. My role in the company has had to change 


radically.” For years now he has had directors in HR, finance and other key areas. “In the early 
days of the business I had to both lead the company and manage every detail. Now I feel that 
the most important role I can fill is that of the group’s leader. I have the time now to articulate 
our vision and mission. And I am able to spend time working on our strategy. At Taste Holdings 
we know where we are going and we are going there as a team.” (Succeed: October 2010) 

 

Questions: 

8.1.1. Explain Carlo’s reasons for not wanting to accept gifts from suppliers? (2) 

8.1.2. What does Carlo mean by, “unambiguous values? (3) 

8.1.3. Discuss the significance of the title, “your own true north” (3) 

8.1.4. A key Management teaching is “stick to your core competencies.” Explain the 

reasoning behind moving from fast foods, to restaurant dining and then jewelry. (5) 

8.1.5. Identify some of the key lessons Carlo learned, whilst owning the Debonair’s franchise. 

How have these lessons impacted on him? (6) 

8.1.6 What would you consider to be the key characteristics of an entrepreneur or leader 

that Carlo Gonzaga possesses? (6) 

 

 

ARTICLE 8.2. 

 

Read the article below and discuss the key factors of generation of business ideas and product 
identification. 

Sir Richard Charles Nicholas Branson 

Sir Richard Charles Nicholas Branson (born 18 July 1950) is an English businessman and 
investor. He is best known as the founder of Virgin Group, which comprises more than 400 
companies. 

At the age of sixteen his first business venture was a magazine called Student. In 1970, he set 
up a mail-order record business. In 1972, he opened a chain of record stores, Virgin Records, 
later known as Virgin Megastores. Branson's Virgin brand grew rapidly during the 1980s, as he 
set up Virgin Atlantic and expanded the Virgin Records music label. 

According to the Forbes 2014 list of billionaires, Branson is the seventh richest citizen of the 
United Kingdom, with an estimated net worth of US$4.9 billion. 

Branson was born in Blackheath, London, the eldest of three children born to barrister Edward 
James Branson (1918–2011), and Eve Branson (born 1924), a former ballet dancer and air 
hostess. Branson has two younger sisters. His grandfather, the Right Honourable Sir George 


Arthur Harwin Branson, was a judge of the High Court of Justice. Branson was educated 
at Scaitcliffe School, a prep school in Berkshire, before briefly attending Cliff View House School 
in Sussex. Branson attended Stowe School, an independent school in Buckinghamshire until 
the age of sixteen. Branson has dyslexia and had poor academic performance as a student, 
and on his last day at school, his headmaster, Robert Drayson, told him he would either end up 
in prison or become a millionaire. Branson's parents were supportive of his endeavors from an 
early age. 

Record business 

Branson started his record business from a church where he ran The Student magazine. 
Branson interviewed several prominent personalities of the late 1960s for the magazine 
including Mick Jagger and R. D. Laing. Branson advertised popular records in The Student and 
it was an overnight success. Trading under the name "Virgin", he sold records for considerably 
less than the "High Street" outlets, especially the chain W. H. Smith. Branson once said, "There 
is no point in starting your own business unless you do it out of a sense of frustration." The 
name "Virgin" was suggested by one of Branson's early employees because they were all new 
at business. At the time, many products were sold under restrictive marketing agreements that 
limited discounting, despite efforts in the 1950s and 1960s to limit so-called resale price 
maintenance. 

Branson eventually started a record shop in Oxford Street in London. In 1971, Branson was 
questioned in connection with the selling of records in Virgin stores that had been declared 
export stock. The matter was never brought before a court and Branson agreed to repay any 
unpaid tax and a fine. Branson's mother, Eve, re-mortgaged the family home to help pay the 
settlement. 

Earning enough money from his record store, Branson in 1972 launched the record label Virgin 
Records with Nik Powell and bought a country estate north of Oxford, in which he installed a 
residential recording studio, The Manor Studio. He leased out studio time to fledgling artists, 
including multi-instrumentalist Mike Oldfield, whose debut album Tubular Bells (1973) was the 
first release for Virgin Records and became a chart-topping best-seller. 

Virgin signed such controversial bands as the Sex Pistols, which other companies were 
reluctant to sign. It also won praise for exposing the public to such obscure avant-garde music 
as Faust and Can. Virgin Records also introduced Culture Club to the music world. In 1982, 
Virgin purchased the gay nightclub Heaven. In 1991, in a consortium with David Frost, Branson 
made an unsuccessful bid for three ITVfranchisees under the CPV-TV name. The early 1980s 


also saw his only attempt as a producer—on the novelty record, "Baa, Baa, Black Sheep", by 
Singing Sheep in association with Doug McLean and Grace McDonald. The recording was a 
series of sheep baa-ing along to a drum-machine-produced track and reached number 42 in the 
UK charts in 1982. 

In 1992, to keep his airline company afloat, Branson sold the Virgin label to EMI for 
£500 million. Branson said that he wept when the sale was completed because the record 
business had been the very start of the Virgin Empire. In 1996 he created V2 Records to re-
enter the music business, owning 5% himself. 

Business ventures 

Main article: Timeline of Richard Branson's business ventures 

Branson formed Virgin Atlantic Airways in 1984, launched Virgin Mobile in 1999, and Virgin 
Blue in Australia (now named Virgin Australia) in 2000. He was ninth in the Sunday Times Rich 
List 2006, worth slightly more than £3 billion. Branson wrote in his autobiography of the decision 
to start an airline: 

My interest in life comes from setting myself huge, apparently unachievable challenges and 
trying to rise above them ... from the perspective of wanting to live life to the full, I felt that I had 
to attempt it. 

In 1993, Branson took what many saw as being one of his riskier business exploits by entering 
into the railway business. Virgin Trains won the franchises for the former Intercity West 
Coast and Cross-Country sectors of British Rail. 

Virgin acquired European short-haul airline Euro Belgian Airlines in 1996 and renamed it Virgin 
Express. In 2006, the airline was merged with SN Brussels Airlines forming Brussels Airlines. It 
also started a national airline based in Nigeria, called Virgin Nigeria. Another airline, Virgin 
America, began flying out of San Francisco International Airport in August 2007. Branson has 
also developed a Virgin Cola brand and even a Virgin Vodka brand, which has not been a very 
successful enterprise. As a consequence of these lacklustre performers, the satirical British 
fortnightly magazine Private Eye has been critical of Branson and his companies (see Private 
Eye image caption) 

A series of disputes in the early 1990s caused tension between Virgin Atlantic and British 
Airways, which viewed Virgin as an emerging competitor. Virgin subsequently accused British 
Airways of poaching its passengers, hacking its computers, and leaking stories to the press that 
portrayed Virgin negatively. After the so-called campaign of "dirty tricks", British Airways settled 
the case, giving £500,000 to Branson, a further £110,000 to his airline, and had to pay legal 


fees of up to £3 million. Branson distributed his compensation (the so-called "BA bonus") among 
his staff. 

On 25 September 2004, Branson announced the signing of a deal under which a new space 
tourism company, Virgin Galactic, will license the technology behind Spaceship One—funded 
by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen and designed by legendary American aeronautical engineer 
and visionary Burt Rutan—to take paying passengers into sub-orbital space. Virgin Galactic 
(wholly owned by Virgin Group) plans to make flights available to the public with tickets priced at 
US$200,000 using Scaled Composites White Knight Two. (www.google.com) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

CHAPTER 9 

THE NATURE OF FAMILY BUSINESS 

 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of family businesses. This overall outcome will be achieved 
through the learner’s mastery of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able 
to: 

1. Define a family business 
2. Explain the nature of a family business 
3. Discuss the importance of family businesses 
4. Distinguish between family and non-family business 
5. Outline the complex roles and relationships in family businesses 
6. Display insights into the challenges faced by family businesses 
7. Understand the skills required to address these challenges 
8. Explain the entrepreneurial outlook of family businesses 
9. Understand what transgenerational entrepreneurship is. 


Venter (2015:473) states that family businesses play a significant role in both the stability and 
health of the global economy. She contends that family businesses are the predominant way of 
doing business in South Africa. 

A family business is commonly defined as one that has been started by a family member and 
has been passed, or is expected to be passed, to successive generations of the family, 
sometimes through marriage. Descendants of the original founder(s) will own and/or control the 
business and members of the family work, participate and benefit from the business. In this 
context, a family member is defined as anyone related to the family by birth or marriage or 
anyone related to the officers of the business. 

A family business may also be defined as when at least 51% of the equity of a business is 
owned by a single family. Poza and Daugherty (2014:1) state that family businesses are 
ubiquitous. They consider family businesses to constitute the whole gamut of enterprises in 
which an entrepreneur or next-generation CEO and one or more family members strategically 
influence the firm. This influence is through their managerial or broad participation, their 


ownership control, the strategic preferences of shareholders and the culture and values family 
shareholder impart to the enterprise. 

Maas (in Nieman, Hough and Nieuwenhuizen, 2003:181) makes the point that a family business 
is not a normal business because of the involvement of family issues that are, by nature, more 
emotional. Maas defines a family business as one that is influenced by family ties in order to 
achieve the vision of the family over, potentially, several generations. Emerging from this 
definition are four general remarks: 

. The family (or a part thereof) is actively involved in the business 
. Family members have a definite input into the strategic direction of the business 
. There is more than one family member involved in the business 
. The intention is to continue the family business over time. 


 

Burns (2007:415) offers three definitions of what constitutes a family business: 

. An owner-managed enterprise with family members predominantly involved in its 
administration, operations and the determination of its destiny (Poutziouris, 1994) 
. A company in which majority ownership or control lies in a single family and in which two 
or more family members are directly involved in the business (Rosenblatt et al., 1985) 
. A company is which 25% of the voting shares are controlled by the family (Nelton, 1986) 


 

Timmons and Spinelli (2007:579) define the term family enterprising as the proactive and 
continuous search for opportunistic growth and contend that the outcome of family enterprising 
is transgenerational entrepreneurship and wealth creation. 

Poza and Daugherty (2014:6) ‘arrive’ at a working definition of a family business as a synthesis 
of the following: 

. Ownership control by two or more members of a family 
. Strategic influence by family members on the management of an organisation, either by 
being active members of management, by serving as advisors or board members, or by 
being active shareholders. 
. Concern for family relationships 
. The dream or possibility of continuity across generations. 


 


 1 


Poza and Daugherty (2014:70) refer to the following characteristics which define the ‘essence of 
the distinctiveness of family businesses: 

. The presence of the family 
. The overlap of family, management and ownership 
. The unique sources of competitive advantage derived from the interaction of family, 
management and ownership. 
. The owner’s dream of keeping the business in the family. 
. The strategic influence of noneconomic family goals and values. 


Systems Theory is the theoretical approach most often used in the study of family business. In 
this approach, the family business is modelled as comprising three overlapping, interacting and 
interdependent subsystems of family, management and ownership. 

The Systems Theory model of family business can be illustrated as follows: 

 

1 


 

 

Ownership 

 

6 


4 


 

5 


7 


3 


2 


Management 

Organisation 

Family 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


The groups identified in the model are: 

1. Other owners 
2. Family members 
3. Managers and employees 
4. Family owners’ 
5. Family owner-managers 
6. Owner-managers 
7. Family employees 


Based on these subsystems, there can be a categorisation of family businesses based on their 
propensity to have a family-first, ownership-first or management-first perspective on issues. In 
family-first businesses, employment in the business is a birthright. The stereotype of nepotism 
arises as a result of suboptimisation of the family subsystem. In addition, benefits from the 
business to family members are often extensive. Management-first family businesses are likely 
to discourage family members from working in the business and/or require work experience 
outside the business as a prerequisite for employment. There is no automatic commitment to 
family-business continuity among management-first companies because the organisation is 
seen as a productive asset. In ownership-first family businesses, investment time horizons and 
perceived risk are the most significant issues. These businesses may have shorter time frames 
within which financial results are evaluated (Poza and Daugherty, 2014:11-13). 

 

Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen (2014: 236) refer to two broad systems in family businesses: the 
family and the business: 

 

 


Business 
System 

Potential 
Conflict 

Confli 

Family 
System 

 

 

Success in a family business can be ensured only if the two broad systems are balanced. If one 
system dominates the other, conflict can be expected, which could destroy the family business. 
These two subsystems can be further divide. The family system can comprise the family, family 

 


 

by marriage, parents, brothers and sisters, and family inside and outside the business. The 
business system can consist of managers, owners, employees and external networks. 

Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen (2014: 236) state that the two-system model can be expanded to 
give a more effective reflection of the complexity of a family business: 

 

Ownership 

3 

1 

 

2 

 

 

4 

 

7 & 8 

5 

 

6 

 

 

Family 

 

 

Family 

 

Business 

 

The different roles as outlined by Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen (2014: 237) are: 

1. Family members 
2. Non-family members 
3. Non-family employees 
4. Family shareholders 
5. Non-family working owners 
6. Working family members 


7 & 8. Working family owners 

This illustrates that role clarification is a critical activity within the family business as the above 
roles are quite diverse. 


 

Poza and Daugherty (2014:15) contend that the competitive advantages inherent to family 
businesses can be best explained by the resource-based view of organisations. The resource-
based view considers the unique, specific, complex, dynamic and intangible resources of an 
organisation, often referred to as competences embedded in the internal processes, human 
resources and other intangible assets that provide an organisation with competitive advantage. 
In a family business, one of these resources may be the overlapping owner and manager 
responsibilities. These can lead to advantages such as reduced administrative costs and 
speedier decision making. The owner-manager overlap may also enable longer time horizons 
for measuring company performance. 

At the heart of the family business are its distinctive values and beliefs – its culture. Whilst 
family culture can be a tremendous asset for the business, it can also create the potential for 
conflict. The problem arises when there are differences between the family and business 
cultures. Families exist primarily to take care of and nurture family members, whereas 
businesses exist to profitably generate goods and services. The family culture is based on 
emotion emphasizing loyalty, caring and sharing. It is inward looking and lasts a lifetime. In 
contrast, business culture is unemotional, task-orientated and is based on self-interest. It is 
outward-looking, rewarding performance and penalizing lack of performance. Conflict between 
the two cultures is unlikely at start-up but, as the organization grows and time passes, the 
potential for conflict increases (Burns, 2007:416). 

 

Business 

Unemotional 

Self-interest 

Task -based 

 Reward performance 

 Perform or leave 

 Outward-looking 

 

Family 

Emotional 

Loyal 

Caring 

Sharing 

Inward-looking 

Lifetime membership Potential 

for 
Conflict 

 

 

 


The unique resources that family businesses can utilise to create competitive advantages are: 

. Overlapping responsibilities of owners and managers, along with smaller size that may 
enable quicker speed to market 
. Concentrated ownership structure, which leads to higher overall productivity and longer term 
commitment to investments in people and innovation 
. A focus on customer and market niches, which can result in higher returns on investments 
. The desire to protect the family name and reputation, which may translate into high 
product/service quality, brand equity and higher returns on investment. 
. The nature of the family-ownership-management interaction, family unity, and ownership 
commitment which support lower administrative costs, skills/knowledge transfer across 
generations, and agility in rapidly changing markets. (Poza and Daugherty, 2014:16) 


Urban, Venter, Beder, Reddy, Oosthuizen and Venter (2015:483) outline the following 
advantages that are evident in family businesses: 

. A unique atmosphere inside the business that creates a sense of belonging and high levels 
of caring and concern for individuals which may result in commitment and loyalty among the 
workforce. 
. A longer-term view of the business may result in a different outlook on employees, 
customers, the community and other stakeholders and this can positively affect the quality of 
the product/service. 
. The business draws strength from the shared history, identity and common language of the 
family. When key managers are relatives, their traditions, values and priorities emanate from 
a common source. 
. Family businesses display flexibility and offer quick decision-making. This flexibility in time, 
work and money may lead to competitive advantage. 
. The family’s reputation and relationships with suppliers, customers and other stakeholders 
are often strong and value laden. 
. The alignment of ownership and management results in benefits being realised by the 
business. 
. Other advantages include trust, shared values,, shared vision, determination of family 
members in difficult times, opportunities for personal growth and advancement, job security 
and autonomy. 
. Family businesses have greater independence in that they have no pressure from the stock 
market and less or no takeover risk (Venter et al 2015:484). 



Venter et al (2015:481 – 482) provide the following table of the differences between family 
owned and managed businesses and non-family controlled businesses: 

Family owned and managed 

Not family-controlled 

. Family members in managerial positions 
have a lifetime and personal stake in the 
business 


. The managers interest in the 
business is limited to the specifics of 
the employment contract 


. Family members in managerial positions 
may be with the business for their entire 
careers 


. Managers seldom remain with one 
business for their entire career 


. Family members have an indefinite time 
horizon 


. Managers have shorter time horizons 


. Failure of the business has dramatic 
career and personal and career 
implications for family members, 
especially those in senior positions 


. Failure of the business has relatively 
less personal impact on managers 


. Likelihood of a family member in a 
managerial position being terminated is 
low 


. Likelihood (or perception of likelihood) 
of a manager being terminated or his 
position eliminated is greater 


. Personal gain results from a sense of 
pride in the growth of the organisation, 
success, job creation and family wealth 
creation 


. Personal gain results from 
advancement, promotion and 
increased compensation. 


. Organisational performance tends to be 
correlated with managerial 
compensation 


. Organisational performance tends to 
be less directly correlated with what a 
particular manager earns 


. Decision making tends to be more 
centralised 


. Decision making is often more 
participative and team-based. 


. Internal control systems tend to be more 
informal 


. Internal control systems tend to be 
more formalised 


. Succession can be problematic and 
traumatic even if planned 


. Succession can involve conflict and 
competition 


. Family member managers are 
accountable to self and family 


. Managers are accountable to 
shareholders 


 




Family owned and managed 

Not family-controlled 

. Conflict tends to follow a dynamic 
pattern that is circular; a conflict within 
the family can impact on business 
decisions, which in turn influence family 
dynamics. 


. Conflict tends to follow a more linear 
pattern, such that impacts are more 
traceable over time and isolated. 


. Non-family employees may perceive 
real limits to their upward mobility in the 
business 


. Employees tend to have a greater 
sense of equal opportunity in terms of 
advancement 


. Family affairs directly affect the 
business affairs and vice versa. 


. While personal lives of employees 
affect their job performance, the 
impact is likely to be more on the 
individual than the business 




 

Research by Kachaner, Stalk and Bloch (2012) indicates that family-controlled companies 
surpass their peers because they focus on resilience and not short-term results. During 
economic booms, this approach leads them to forgo some opportunities (and hence do slightly 
worse than their counterparts), but it puts them in a position of strength during downturns, when 
they shine. The researchers identified seven specific ways in which family-run businesses build 
their resilience: 

. They are frugal in good times and bad. 
. They set a high bar for capital expenditures. 
. They carry little debt. 
. They acquire fewer (and smaller) companies. 
. They are more diversified. 
. They are more international. 
. They retain talent better than their competitors do. 


 

Caspar, Dias, and Elstrodt (2014) contend that as family businesses expand from their 
entrepreneurial beginnings, they face unique performance and governance challenges. The 
generations that follow the founder, for example, may insist on running the company even though 
they are not suited for the job. And as the number of family shareholders increases exponentially 
generation by generation, with few actually working in the business, the commitment to carry on as 
owners can’t be taken for granted. Indeed, less than 30 percent of family businesses survive into the 


http://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Organization/Our%20Insights/The%20five%20attributes%20of%20enduring%20family%20businesses/Image_Five%20dimensions_1.ashx
third generation of family ownership. Those that do, however, tend to perform well over time 
compared with their corporate peers. 

To be successful as both the company and the family grow, a family business must meet two 
intertwined challenges: achieving strong business performance and keeping the family committed to 
and capable of carrying on as the owner. Five dimensions of activity must work well and in 
synchrony: harmonious relations within the family and an understanding of how it should be involved 
with the business, an ownership structure that provides sufficient capital for growth while allowing the 
family to control key parts of the business, strong governance of the company and a dynamic 
business portfolio, professional management of the family’s wealth, and charitable foundations to 
promote family values across generations. For a family business to be successful, five dimensions of 
activity must be working well and in synchrony. These five dimensions can be illustrated as 
follows: 

 

(Caspar, Dias and Elstrodt, 2014) 

 

 

 

 


If the systems of family businesses are not in harmony, then conflict might have a detrimental 
effect on the long term survival and growth of the business. Maas refers to the following in this 
regard: 

. Only 30% of family businesses are successful into the second generation 
. Only 10% of family businesses are successful into the third generation 
. The average lifespan of a family business is 24 years (the time the founder-manager stays in 
business) 
. Family businesses become less entrepreneurial when the family system dominates. 


 

This is confirmed by Burns (2007:418) who cites Poutziouris and Chittenden(1996): 

“Four out of five family businesses are managed by the first generation, which benefits from the 
entrepreneurial drive of the founder. However, less than one third of founders successfully pass 
ownership and management control of the family business to the second generation. Only 10 
per cent of second generation family firms are transferred to third generation and less than 5 per 
cent ever reach beyond the third generation of family management” 

Beyond the inherent complexity of family businesses, Lank (in Burley and Muzyka, 2000:194) 
examines the factors that explain the ‘fragility’ of family businesses. Lank provides two sets of 
factors. 

 

Firstly, family businesses disappear for the same reasons as any corporation: 

. The opportunity to sell out at an attractive price 
. Inability to anticipate or adjust to changes in the market 
. Insufficient investment in research and development (R & D) 
. Inadequate control of costs 
. Lack of access to affordable capital 
. Poor management practices 


 

Secondly, there are specific challenges faced by family enterprises: 

. Failure to find capital for growth without diluting the family’s equity 
. Inability to balance the family’s need for liquidity and the business’s need for cash 
. Poor estate planning 
. Lack of willingness of older generation to ‘let go’ of ownership and management power at 
appropriate time 



. Inability to attract and retain competent and motivated family successors 
. Unchecked sibling rivalries with n o consensus on chosen successor 
. Inability to attract and retain competent senior non-family professional managers 
. Unmanaged conflict between the cultures of the family and the business. 


(Lank in Burley and Muzyka, 2000:195) 

According to Timmons and Spinelli (2007:562) family businesses do not always look and act 
entrepreneurially. “They can focus on serving local markets, sustaining the family’s lifestyle or 
providing jobs to family members. They are often conflicted due to family dynamics, constrained 
by nepotism or limited by their conservative risk profile.” 

 

Family businesses can suffer from nepotism and a lack of professionalism. Managers who are 
not family members can feel alienated and isolated, believing that important decisions being 
made without their involvement, ‘over the kitchen table’ rather than in the office. Family conflict 
and politics can result in the business being neglected or business decisions being made for 
other than commercial reasons. It can also mean that the business is used as ‘milk cow’ for the family 
and loses its commercial edge (Burns, 2007:430). 

 

Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen (2014:235) refer to the following problems in family businesses: 

. Succession 
. Keeping the business growing to address the needs of a larger family unit 
. Lack of or poor strategic planning for the business and the family 
. Lack of cohesion between the older and the younger generations 
. Inability to ensure that talent is optimally developed in the family business 
. Family members are appointed without real concern for expertise 
. Family conflicts are not addressed. 
. Members of the family may emigrate. 


 

 

 

 

 


 

Venter et al (2015:485) present the following as the most important challenges and problems 
faced by family businesses: 

. Conflict – the various factors that contribute to conflict in family businesses. These include 
family issues, fair compensation of family members, intra-family rivalry, inter-generational or 
sibling rivalry, determination of power, working versus non-working family members, 
personal issues such as leadership and recognition and filling the founder’s shoes 
(succession). Emotional issues stem from the fact that the family system is emotion-based, 
while the business system is not. Conflict arising from the overlap of family, ownership and 
business systems is thus almost inevitable. 
. Nepotism – is a major disadvantage associated with family businesses. Nepotism can refer 
to tolerance of inept family members as managers, inequitable reward systems and 
difficulties in attracting professional management. In view of the fact that the family has the 
power to pursue its own objectives, these may not always align to acceptable business 
practice. As a consequence, a family member who is incompetent may be promoted or the 
salaries of family members may be established above market rates. 
. Resistance to change – family businesses can become tradition-bound and unwilling to 
change. 
. A paternalistic or autocratic culture is another potential issue of family businesses. 
. The hand-over of the family business from one generation to the next (succession) and a 
change of leadership are often fraught with difficulty. 
. Ineffective communication might be an important obstacle in family business. 
. External issues include increased international competition, an inability to adjust to market 
needs and wants, the negative impact of inheritance taxes and relationships with unions. 
. Lack of effective supervision among family members of themselves. 
. Poor estate planning with outdated wills 
. Lack of methods of governance 
. Inability to cope with the natural evolution of the business 
. Lack of vision and entrepreneurship 
. Inadequate control measures (Venter et al , 2015:486) 


 

 

 


 

Poza and Daugherty (2014:35) state that multigenerational family businesses are fertile grounds 
for what they refer to as zero-sum dynamics. This is a result of the various ways in which 
behaviour can manifest itself. Zero-sum dynamics in relationships are characterised by 
exchanges in which one party’s perceived gain is the other party’s perceived loss. An example 
would be if family members in management are compensated at a fair market price, those not 
active in management assume that they will have to settle for lower dividends to accommodate 
these salaries. Another example may be if those active in management agree on a growth 
strategy, family members employed elsewhere may believe that, in settling for greater 
reinvestment in the business, they will have to accept reduced distributions to shareholders. 

This ‘us-and-them’ zero-sum dynamic can be triggered by any perceived difference: male-
female, active-inactive, richer-poorer, better educated-less educated, older-younger, blood 
relative-in law. Members of multigenerational families that operate on the assumption that 
another family member’s gain is their loss are fertile ground for the development of family 
conflict (Poza and Daugherty, 2014:35). 

Poza and Daugherty (2014:36) describe family systems theory as a theory of human behaviour 
that considers the family to be the building block of emotional life and uses systems thinking 
Poza and Daugherty (2014:35)to understand the complex interaction between individual 
members of the family unit. They describe the work of Bowen (1999) whose theory of family 
systems states, inter alia, that: 

. A family is a system 
. Family systems transfer rules, patterns, messages, or expectations about the behaviour of 
its members. 
. Individuals and families can still learn behaviours and establish patterns different from those 
transferred by messages from the family of origin. 
. Tension and distress tend to make individuals go back in patterns and behaviours learned 
from their family of origin. 


Family systems theory aims to increase the understanding of family patterns and behaviours 
and of how those may help or hinder relationships between family members and between the 
family and the business. It assists in clarifying family messages and family values that influence 
members’ actions, decisions and attitudes. The theory may shed light on the way a family 
communicates, plans, and resolves or denies conflict and helps business families address the 
problems, challenges, and opportunities they face. 


Family-business owners, nonfamily management in family businesses, and service providers to 
family businesses all need to understand the complex matters and the emotional fields that 
impact on a family-owned or family-controlled business – whether the subject is management, 
strategy, successor selection, the location of new premises, acquisitions or the ability to adapt 
and compete (Poza and Daugherty, 2014:36) 

As family businesses expand from their entrepreneurial beginnings, they face unique performance 
and governance challenges. The generations that follow the founder, for example, may insist on 
running the company even though they are not suited for the job. And as the number of family 
shareholders increases exponentially generation by generation, with few actually working in the 
business, the commitment to carry on as owners can’t be taken for granted. Indeed, less than 30 
percent of family businesses survive into the third generation of family ownership. (Caspar et al 
2014). 

A Price-Waterthouse-Coopers (PwC) survey in 2014 has shown that worldwide family 
businesses remain resilient despite the adverse economic environment they found themselves 
in post-recession. Significant challenges facing family businesses continue to focus around 
shortages of skills, the need to innovate, political instability, price competition and the 
containment of costs. The survey also reported that at a time when other businesses were 
struggling to create revenue, around 78% of South African family businesses reported growth in 
the previous 12 months, and 21% were aiming to grow quickly and aggressively over the next 
five years. 

According to Timmons and Spinelli (2007:562) family businesses do not always look and act 
entrepreneurially. “They can focus on serving local markets, sustaining the family’s lifestyle or 
providing jobs to family members. They are often conflicted due to family dynamics, constrained 
by nepotism or limited by their conservative risk profile.” 

 

Family businesses can suffer from nepotism and a lack of professionalism. Managers who are 
not family members can feel alienated and isolated, believing that important decisions being 
made without their involvement, ‘over the kitchen table’ rather than in the office. Family conflict 
and politics can result in the business being neglected or business decisions being made for 
other than commercial reasons. It can also mean that the business is used as ‘milk cow’ for the 
family and loses its commercial edge (Burns, 2007:430). 

 


However, Timmons and Spinelli argue that these realities must be contrasted with the fact that 
families comprise the dominant form of business organization worldwide, and provide more 
resources for the entrepreneurial economy than any other source (2007:562). 

This is supported by Lank (in Burley and Muzyka, 2000:193) who says that “family enterprises 
are a – if not the – major contributor to the economic and social well-being of all capitalist 
economies” 

Timmons and Spinelli (2007:567) present five different roles families play in the entrepreneurial 
process and distinguish between formal and informal application of these roles: 

 

Family-
Influenced 
Startups 

Family 
Corporate 
Venturing 

Family 
Corporate 
Renewal 

Family 
Private Cash 

Family 
Investment 
Funds 

Formal 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Informal 

An 
entrepreneur 
with no legacy 
assets/ existing 
business, but 
who formally 
launches a new 
business with 
family and/or 
intending to 
involve family 

An 
entrepreneur 
with no legacy 
assets/ existing 
business who 
happens to 
start a new 
business out of 
necessity and it 
begins to 
involve family 
members 

Family holding 
companies or 
businesses that 
have formal 
new venture 
creation and/or 
acquisition 
strategies, 
plans, 
departments, or 
capabilities 

Family holding 
companies or 
businesses that 
grow through 
more informal, 
intuitive, and 
opportunistic 
business 
startup and 
acquisitions 

Family-controlled 
companies with a 
formal strategic 
growth plan for 
creating new 
streams of value 
through change 
in business 
strategy, model 
or structure 

 

Intuitive growth 
initiatives that 
result in a change 
in business 
strategy, model 
or structure and 
new streams of 
value for the 
family company 

Startup money 
from family 
member or 
business with 
a formal 
written 
agreement for 
market-base 
ROI and/or 
repayment 

 

Startup money 
or gift from 
family member 
or business 
with no 
agreement or 
conversation 
about ROI or 
repayment 

Stand-alone 
professional or 
private equity 
or venture 
capital fund 
controlled by 
family and/or 
using family 
generated 
capital 

 

Internal capital 
and/or funds 
used by family 
owners to 
invest in real 
estate, passive 
partnerships, 
or seed new 
businesses 



 

 

 


 

The concept entrepreneurship has been defined according to several perspectives. Behavioural 
definitions of entrepreneurship are concerned with the roles that individuals play with reference 
to specific behaviours which sets them apart from others. Venter et al (2015:8) provide the 
definition by Schumpeter (1934) in this regard: “he entrepreneur is an innovator who carries out 
new combinations of economic development, which are new goods, a new method of 
production, new markets, new sources of raw materials, or a new organisational form. The 
entrepreneur is the co-ordinator of production and agent of change.” 

Process definitions of entrepreneurship focus on how the entrepreneurial process is navigated 
and cover the different components in the process as it relates to individuals, businesses and 
society. Venter et al (2015:8) illustrate this by the definition of Hisrich and Peters (1998): 
“Entrepreneurship is the process of creating something new with value by devoting the 
necessary time and effort, assuming the accompanying financial, psychic and social risks, and 
receiving the resulting rewards of monetary and personal satisfaction and independence.” 

Outcomes definitions of entrepreneurship focus on the results of entrepreneurship and this 
approach is shown in Gartner’s (1990) definition: “Entrepreneurship is the creation of new 
organisations (Venter et al, 2015:8). 

Venter et al (2015:21) state that the process of pursuing a new venture is embodied in the 
entrepreneurial process. There are six components that are generic to this entrepreneurial 
process. Entrepreneurs: 

. Locate business opportunities 
. Accumulate resources 
. Market products and services 
. Produce products 
. Build organisations 
. Respond to government and society. 


Starting a family business or joining a family business can be regarded as a route to 
entrepreneurship. Family businesses are deemed to be successful if they generate monetary 
value for both the family of the owner and the non-family stakeholders (Venter et al, 2015:498). 
In this regard the ability of family businesses to create continuity and growth across generations 
(transgeneration potential) is critical. 


Entrepreneurial performance has been recognised as the most significant performance outcome 
of a family business (Habbershon et al, 2010 cited in Venter et al, 2015:498) as it is a driver of 
transgenerational potential and success. 

One way to increase entrepreneurial performance and transgenerational potential in family 
businesses is through entrepreneurial orientation (EO) there are five dimensions to EO – 
autonomy, innovativeness, risk taking, proactiveness and aggressiveness. 

Entrepreneurial performance in family businesses can also be as a result of familiness resource 
pools (Zellweger and Sieger, 2012 cited in Venter et al 2015:499). Familiness refers to the 
exclusive and unique capabilities and resources that family businesses contain as a result of the 
interaction between the family, its members and the business. Familiness provides family 
businesses with a competitive advantage which is difficult to imitate and promotes 
transgenerational success. Familiness resource pools comprise eight dimensions: 

. Leadership 
. Networks 
. Capital 
. Decision-making 
. Culture 
. Relationships 
. Governance 
. Knowledge 


Spinelli and Adams (2012:525) utilise the phrase family enterprising to describe families who 
leverage the entrepreneurial process in the family context. Enterprising is the action of 
generating economic activity. Consistent with the definitions of entrepreneurship, families who 
are enterprising generate new economic activity and build long term value across generations. 
This outcome is referred to as transgenerational entrepreneurship and wealth creation. 

 

 

 

 

 


 

The mind-set for enterprising includes the following characteristics: 

. A proclivity for higher risk 
. A desire to create new revenue streams 
. A commitment to generating next-generation entrepreneurship 
. A willingness to continually revisit the business model 
. A willingness to leverage the business 
. A desire to reinvest distribute 
. A strategy to manage the family’s wealth 
. A commitment to innovation in business strategies and structures 


(Spinelli and Adams, 2012:533) 

 

Spinelli and Adams (2012:533) also list the characteristics of the entrepreneurial methods for 
enterprising: 

. Allocating disproportionate resources to new business opportunities 
. Systematically searching for and capturing new opportunities 
. Seeking new opportunities beyond the core (legacy) business 
. Creating a core competency in innovation 
. Initiating competitive change 
. Making changes in products, services, markets and customers 
. Investing early to develop or adopt new technology and processes 
. Institutionalising the entrepreneurial process in the organisation 
. Having formal routines for gathering and disseminating market intelligence 


 

 

 

 

 

 


The six dimensions for family enterprising are: 

Leadership – entrepreneurial leaders create a sense of shared urgency in the organisation. A 
transgenerational commitment requires families to move beyond the ‘great leader’ model to the 
‘great group’. The leader must empower the family and the organisation to be enterprising 

Relationship – the family must have the relationship capital to sustain their transgenerational 
commitments. Relationship capital is the reserve of attributes such as trust, loyalty, positive 
feelings, goodwill, forgiveness, commitment and altruistic motives. Relationship capital is a 
necessary condition for transgenerational families. 

Vision – a compelling vision is what creates the shared urgency for family enterprising and 
mobilising and energising people in the family business. Such a vision has to make sense in the 
light of tomorrow’s marketplace realities and has to describe how the family will collectively 
create new streams of wealth that will enable the family business to be multigenerational. 

Strategy – the family must have an intentional strategy to enable them to find their competitive 
advantage as a family. This relates to a formal approach to developing strategies for cultivating 
and capturing business opportunities. The strategic thinking and planning should be based on 
determining how to exploit the unique family-based resources and capabilities to find 
advantages in enterprising. The strategy will also include things like finding synergies with 
current assets, leveraging networks of personal relationships, cultivating next-generation 
entrepreneurs and extending the power of the family reputation. 

Governance – this relates to the structures and policies that stimulate change and growth in the 
family and the organisation. The lack of effective governance structures and policies creates 
ambiguity in families and constrains enterprising. In addition, when entrepreneurial processes 
are institutionalised through the governance structures and policies, growth and change 
activities are promoted. 

Performance – families who are enterprising are market driven and seek to accelerate their 
wealth creation through their opportunistic entrepreneurial actions. 

The performance of the business has to meet the requirements for transgenerational 
entrepreneurship and wealth creation. This requires clear financial benchmarks and information 
for assessing performance. 


Spinelli and Adams (2012:541) conclude that for business families who would like to act more 
entrepreneurially and become intentional enterprising families that have multiple generations 
seeking higher-potential opportunities, four strategic shifts are required: 

. From a business that has the goal of personal comfort for the owners to an enterprising 
family committed to transgenerational entrepreneurship and wealth creation 
. From an intuitive family business that ‘looks around’ to see what new opportunities turn up to 
an intentional entrepreneurial process that actively seeks to generate and exploit new 
opportunities. 
. From a senior-generation entrepreneur who does it to a successor-generation 
entrepreneurial process and team that create opportunities for others to do it. 
. From a low potential entrepreneurial family that creates one-off businesses as they can to a 
higher-potential entrepreneurial family that mobilises resources to create transgenerational 
wealth. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Related image 


 

CHAPTER 10 

BUSINESS PLANS 

 

 

 

Specific Learning Outcomes 

The overall outcome for this section is that, on its completion, the learner should be able to 
demonstrate a broad understanding of business planning. This overall outcome will be achieved 
through the learner’s mastery of the following specific outcomes, in that the learner will be able 
to: 

1. Understand the importance of business plans 
2. Discuss the purpose(s) of business plans 
3. Describe the components of a business plan 


 

10.1 Introduction 

Every successful entrepreneur needs a Business Plan for a variety of different reasons. Some 
need the plan as a guide to achieve goals, short and long-term; others use the plan as a tool to 
raise funding. Whatever your reason the plan is your ‘flight plan’ which lets you and everyone in 
the firm know the direction in which you aim to go, the product or service you will offer to the 
market, the pricing, promotion and distribution strategies which will be employed and the 
expected financial returns. 

 

(Africa Sunrise Guest House https://encrypted-tbn2.gstatic.com/) 


Whatever the reason, the Business Plan if presented should be eye catching, of a high quality 
and it must gain the reader’s attention immediately. 

10.2 Reasons for Using a Business Plan 

There are three main reasons for an entrepreneur to draw up a Business Plan 

a) To obtain Funding 


The Business Plan is a vital tool in approaching and securing financial sources. Any 
investor wants to know that the business is well planned and has a good strategy, and 
a sound financial basis.(Struwig, 2014:120) (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 2009:104) 

b) To serve an inside purpose 


The Business Plan can be used internally to set company objectives, and focus 
efforts towards attaining them. Similarly it can be used in a controlling function as a 
feedback to measure actual versus forecasted results. 

If the business is being sold, the Business Plan allows outsiders to form a clear 
picture of what the firm is doing and the ‘road map’ it is taking to achieve its desired 
results. (Struwig, 2014:120) 

 

c) To be used as a tool to reduce risk 


When the entrepreneur goes through the process of drawing up a detailed Business 
Plan, it forces him/her to think through the entire operation fully and carefully. The 
entrepreneur often has to consider alternatives and new possibilities. It also focuses 
the entrepreneur to complete the financial analysis and set the Business Plan up as a 
yardstick for future comparison. (Struwig, 2014:120) (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 
2009:104) 

An entrepreneur setting up a new firm needs a business plan for several reasons 

(i) To explore the feasibility of a new business without actually having to start it and run 
it and to 
(ii) Provide a handy tool to establish a value if you are contemplating buying or selling a 
business and to support that value if challenged. 
(i) If you are seeking financing (Bangs, 2005: 5-6) 


 

Remember when setting up your plan be clear, simple and make your presentation as attractive 
as possible. 


…" People evaluating a plan want an overview in a nutshell “ 

(Kroon, 1998:207) 

 

A Business Plan offers a broad overview of the entire organisation’s mission, objectives, 
strategy and resource allocation (Kotler and Armstrong et al., 2010:633) (Kotler and Keller, 
2012:A1) and should achieve its aim. 

10.3 Importance of the Business Plan 

It is important for an entrepreneur setting up a new firm to prepare a business plan because he 
can 

(ii) Explore the feasibility of a new business without actually having to start it and run it 
and to 
(iii) Provide a handy tool to establish a value if you are contemplating buying or selling a 
business and to support that value if challenged. 
(iv) If you are seeking financing (Bangs, 2005: 5-6) 


 

10.4 Purpose of a Business Plan 

There are various purposes that an alert Entrepreneur can make use of a Business Plan. It 
depends on the stage of the firm. Is the firm new and requiring start-up funding, or is it 
established and using the Business Plan to redefine its Goals or renegotiate a loan with a bank. 
Possibly an existing supplier is putting pressure on the credit facilities of the company and it is 
wise to sit down with the supplier (creditor) and present a Business Plan showing the direction 
and current financial status of the company. Below are some of the purposes the Business Plan 
is used . 

Clarify Direction 

The primary purpose of a business plan is to define what the business is or what it intends to be 
over time. This allows you to understand what needs to be done for forward movement. 
Describing can consist of a simple explanation of your business and its products or services 
you'll offer, as well as a detailed description of your ideal customer. (Burns-Millyard, 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/) 


Helps Get Advice 

Business professionals may be more likely to give you free advice about your business if they 
can comment objectively on numbers, rather than having to give you their personal opinion of 
your "great idea." Some organizations will not only give you free advice on launching a 
business, but will assign an executive to read your business plan and offer suggestions for 
improving it. (Ashe-Edmunds, Sam (2016) What Are the Benefits of a Business Plan? 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/) 

Standard Bank for example has assistance for new entrepreneurs including 

. free Business Plan templates 

. cash management checklist 

. how to read and understand financial statements 

. and access to a Free eBook 

(https://bizconnect.standardbank.co.za/) 

Manage Company 

The Managerial part of a Business Plan shows the organisational structure of your business, 
including titles of directors or officers and their individual duties. It also acts as a management 
tool that can be referred to regularly to ensure the business is on course with meeting goals, 
sales targets or operational milestones. 

(Burns-Millyard, Kathy (http://smallbusiness.chron.com/) 

Aids in Obtaining Funding 

A thoroughly prepared business plan will improve your chances of obtaining additional funding. 
Potential investors will have a variety of questions about your potential or existing business. A 
complete business plan not only provides them with answers, but shows that you are organized 
and have considered all of the marketing, legal, financial, human resources and other aspects 
of running a business. (Ashe-Edmunds, Sam (2016) http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ ) 

Identifies Problems 

A well prepared Business Plan considers all the key areas of running your company. As you 
analyse the information you wish to include in your Business Plan, you may learn that some of 
the ideas that you had about your financial budgets, cost of materials, distribution costs, labour 
costs, and other critical aspects of your business are incorrect. Learning this before you launch 
your business gives you time to make adjustments before you have signed contracts and 
committed funds. Business plans include budgets that help you manage cash flow and 
breakeven points –not just assumptions about marketing. (Ashe-Edmunds, Sam (2016) 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ ) 


Image result for purpose of a business plan
Provides Exit Strategy 

A good Business Plan sets realistic criteria for shutting down the business to prevent your 
throwing good money after bad. A business failure can be very disturbing and business owners 
are often not objective in the face of that reality. Solid numbers that tell you the business is 
unsound and flawed will help you make the decision to shut down a failing business easier and 
will prevent you from losing more of your or your investors' money than necessary. (Ashe-
Edmunds, Sam (2016) http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ ) 

Minimises Legal Problems 

You may need local, state or federal licenses or permits to operate your business. You will need 
to pay taxes properly, using the correct forms, and operating under proper procedures. A 
Business Plan addresses all of the legal and financial issues involved with operating your firm to 
help you avoid penalties, fines or the loss of your business. (Ashe-Edmunds, Sam (2016) 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ ) 

 

 

Source: Purpose of a Business Plan http://image.slidesharecdn.com 


10.5 Benefits of a Business Plan 

A well written Business Plan has several benefits to the company. 

According to Burns-Millyard (2016) there are three major benefits to writing and compiling a 
Business Plan. 

Future Vision 

Businesses change and adapt over time, and allowing for future growth and direction in the 
business plan can be an effective way to plan for these changes. The entrepreneur should take 
into account future growth or trends, and new innovations to take as the firm adapts. Future 
vision allows you to have goals to reach for. 

Attract Financing 

The Financial section of the Business Plan will show whether or not a business has the potential 
to make a profit. By putting statistics, facts, figures and detailed plans in writing, a new business 
has a better chance of attracting investors to provide the capital needed for getting started. 

Attract Team Members 

Business plans can be designed as a selling tool to attract partners, secure supplier accounts 
and attract executive level employees into the new venture. Business plans can be shared with 
the executive candidates or desired partners to help convince them of the potential for the 
business, and persuade them to join the team.( Burns-Millyard, K (2016 ) 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com]) 

Plus the Business Plan will assist you in staying on track and keeping focussed on your main 
priorities. 


Related image 


Source: Benefits of a Business Plan http://image.slidesharecdn.com/ 

10.6 A Typical Business Plan Structure 

A typical Business Plan consists of nine (9) sections. These are not always included, or are 
sometimes ordered differently depending on the type of firm and the reason for the Business 
Plan. But he average Business Plan will include the following sections 

(i) Cover Page 
(ii) Table of Contents 
(iii) Executive Summary 
(iv) Product and/or Services Plan 
(v) Marketing Plan 
(vi) Operations Plan 
(vii) Management Plan or structure 
(viii) Financial Plan plus 
(ix) Appendices 


It should be noted that the business plans differ according to industry. Thus, the Operations 
Plan for a Retailer would focus on the details of suppliers and logistics in the Marketing Plan. 
Similarly, if you were using the Business Plan to seek financing, then directly after the Executive 
Summary it would make sense to describe in complete detail the members of the Management 
Team, their qualifications and what each person will contribute to the firm’s success. 


 

Below is the illustration of a Marketing Plan which is just part (v) of a Business Plan. 

The Business Plan is a written presentation that carefully explains the business, its 
managerial team, its products or services and its goals, together with strategies for 
reaching the goals. 

(Nieman, Hough et al., 2003:90). 

 

 

Source: Kotler, P (2000) Marketing Management Millenium Edition (10th edition) Pearson 
Education; Upper Saddle Valley, New Jersey 

 

It should be noted that the business plans differ according to industry. Thus, the Operations 
Plan for a Retailer would focus on the details of suppliers and logistics in the Marketing Plan. 
Similarly, if you were using the Business Plan to seek financing, then directly after the Executive 
Summary it would make sense to describe in complete detail the members of the Management 
Team, their qualifications and what each person will contribute to the firm’s success. 


Image result for structure of a business plan
. 

10.7 What elements do we include in the Business Plan? 

Comprehensive business plans have three sections--business concept, marketplace and 
financial--and these are broken down into seven components that include the overview or 
summary of the plan, a description of the business, market strategies, competition analysis, 
design and development, operations and management, and financial information.( Burns-
Millyard, K (2016) http://smallbusiness.chron.com/ ) 

Running a business with a Business Plan requires every element included to ensure that it is 
comprehensive and fully researched. We may not show everything in a presentation, but for our 
own internal use a complete Business Plan is advised. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 An entrepreneur setting up a new firm needs a business plan for several reasons 

(v) To explore the feasibility of a new business without actually having to start it and run 
it and to 
(vi) Provide a handy tool to establish a value if you are contemplating buying or selling a 
business and to support that value if challenged. 
(vii) If you are seeking financing (Bangs, 2005: 5-6) 


 

 

http://www.btsbusinessplan.com 


 

10.8 The Cover page 

The Cover Page is the first impression the Business Plan proposal makes on the reader. This 
page should be simple, clear and attractive, yet it should contain the important ingredients of 

. The full name of the business 
. A brief description or mission statement 
. The Title, date written and 
. The author’s name (Awe, 2006:59) 


Struwig in Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen., (2014:120) also advises including the full street 
address and the ownership status. Bangs (2005:196) makes mention that some plans include a 
confidentiality notice on the cover page and he also stresses the importance of the contribution 
it makes to the first impression. 

10.9 Table of Contents 

Your contents page should be the very last thing you write to ensure that all the page numbers 
are correct. Make sure that you number your pages correctly so that a person can quickly and 
easily find the sections they are interested in.(Fisher, 2016) The easiest way to number the 
pages correctly, is to set up a separate word document or ‘chapter’ for the Table of Contents. 
Once the entire Business Plan is completed and the Executive Summary is finalised then 
number the pages sequentially. Print the Business Plan with the numbered pages and then 
complete the Table of Contents professionally with the various subheadings, showing the 
different pages correctly numbered, neatly extended at the end of each line. 

10.10 Executive Summary 

The Executive Summary is the first part of the plan anyone will see after the title page, and table 
of contents.(Bangs, 2005:83) Because it summarises the entire Business Plan in such a short 
discussion, usually a page or two, this is the section you should take the most time over. It is 
advised by most authors to complete this section after the entire Business Plan is finished. 
(Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 2014:121) (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 2009:105) (Awe, 
2006:60 and 62) (Ferrell and Hartline, 2001:43) (Fisher, 2016) The Executive Summary should 
also identify the scope and time frame of the plan. (Ferrell and Hartline, 2001:43) 


Since the Executive Summary can only be completed once the entire Business Plan is finished, 
the final discussion on this section will conclude once the chapters which will deal with the last 
two sections of the plan:- the Marketing Plan and the Financial Plan have been covered in 
detail. 

10.11 The Management Plan or Management Structure 

The quality of the members comprising the management of the company often makes a huge 
difference between success and failure of the new enterprise. It is wise, therefore, to list the 
names and qualifications of the various directors and other key professionals who will be 
involved in the business. (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 2014:122) . (Nieman and 
Nieuwenhuizen, 2009:106) Each of their detailed résumés can be included in an Appendix. 

Sometimes it is simpler to include an organisation chart showing the firm’s structure (or intended 
structure) 

When you give your management teams background it is even suggested that you not only 
describe their titles, but also what each member of the management team will be expected to 
do. (Bangs, 2005:96) 

 “Many investors look first at the Executive Summary and then then go directly to the 
management team section to assess the strength of the people starting the firm.” 
Barringer and Ireland 2015 

10.12 Company Overview and Product and /or Services Plan 

Following the Executive Summary and the management team, logically the reader should be 
introduced to a brief business overview of the enterprise/proposed enterprise. This section 
should briefly describe the product or service you are offering, the industry status and where the 
new business fits in. (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 2014:121). (Nieman and Nieuwenhuizen, 
2009:105) It is of vital importance that an entrepreneur has a complete knowledge and 
understanding of the product or service the firm is offering to the market. Any investor or 
financier potentially about to assist with funding will invariably turn down the proposal if he/she 
feels that the entrepreneur’s product knowledge is weak or lacking detail and analysis. 

 

 


…" A Dream written down with a date becomes a Goal 

A Goal broken down into steps becomes a Plan 

A Plan backed by Action makes your dreams come true. 

It is even suggested that the entrepreneur describe any features which will clearly differentiate 
the product or service and give it an advantage over the competition. (Nieman and 
Nieuwenhuizen, 2014:121)) 

You could also include some short-term and long-term goals which are specifically to be major 
parts of the Business Plan. (Awe, 2006:60) 

Today’s customers are even more selective. They are socially connected and far more aware 
than twenty years ago about environmental and health issues. So the next level of marketing 
has become a priority as well. 

10.13 The Marketing Plan 

The Marketing Plan is an action plan within the Business Plan, with the customer as a starting 
point. It is also linked to the plans of the other departments within the company. (Kotler and 
Armstrong et al., 2010: 633) (Kotler and Keller, 2012:A1). 

Both Kotler and Keller (2012:A1) and Kotler and Armstrong (2010:633) point out that the length 
of the Marketing Plans vary from company to company. 

 

10.14 The Operations Plan 

This needs to cover the organisational processes the business will use to achieve its daily 
outcomes, and therefore, long-term outcomes for success. It needs to cover all the important 
points regarding how the business will function including physical set-up and any 
responsibilities, and desired outcomes for each task. (LINKILAW, 2016 http://linkilaw.com/) 

Just as your Business Plan should estimate the size of your market, it should also estimate 
“what they want” . The Operations section of the Business plan sets out how the firm will provide 
the goods and/or services to the customers if the business is run efficiently. (Hauk , 2016 
http://articles.bplans.com/) 


The Operational Plan explains the day to day running of the business. Its location, equipment, 
people, processes, and surrounding environment and how the business functions on a 
continuing basis. There will also be a description of capital and expense requirements related 
to the functioning of the business. . (Fisher, 2016: http://www.entrepreneurmag.co.za/) 

This section will vary depending on the nature of the business . 

Thus a Retail operations checklist might include 

. Marketing (i.e. sales projections, sales reports ) 
. Training sales staff 
. Buying procedures 
. Inventory control 
. Customer service policies to name a few 
. Administration profit feedback controls (Bangs, 2005:149) adapted 


Whereas a Manufacturing operations checklist might feature items such as 

. Production plan 
. Basic manufacturing operations listed in sequence 
. Raw materials purchased 
. J.I.T. system 
. Equipment obtained 
. Administering monitoring and control policies 
. Training for cross-skilled workforce 
. Quality control and so on (Bangs , 2005:151) adapted 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Books%20Clip%20Art 


 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Alos, Albert J. and Bamiro, Olufemi A. (2005). The Pains and Gains of Growth. Case Studies on 
Entrepreneurship Lagos. Criterion Publishers 

 

Beaver, Graham. (2002). Small Business Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development 

Harlow. Prentice-Hall 

 

Birley, Sue and Muzyka, Daniel F. (2000). Mastering Entrepreneurship London. Prentice-Hall 

 

Bolton, Bill and Thompson, John. (2000).Entrepreneurs Talent, Temperament, Technique 

Oxford. Butterworth-Heinemann 

 

Burke, Rory. (2006).Entrepreneurs Toolkit Burke Publishing 

Burke, Rory. (2006).Small Business Entrepreneur Burke Publishing 


Burns, Paul (2007). Entrepreneurship and Small Business. Second edition 

New York. Palgrave Macmillan 

 

Burns, Paul (2005). Corporate Entrepreneurship 

New York. Palgrave Macmillan 

 

Dollinger, Marc J. (2003). Entrepreneurship Strategies and Resources.Third edition 

Singapore. Pearson Education 

 

Ehlers, T. and Lazenby, K. (editors). 2005. Strategic Management Southern African Concepts 
and Cases. Pretoria. Van Schaik 

 

Hisrich, Robert D. and Peters, Micheal P. (2002). Entrepreneurship. Fifth edition New Delhi. 
Tata Mc-Graw Hill 

 

 

 


Holt, David D. (2002). Entrepreneurship New Venture Creation New Delhi. Prentice-Hall 

 

Katz, Jerome A. and Green, Richard P. (2007). Entrepreneurial Small Business 

Boston. Mc-Graw Hill Irwin 

 

Kaplan, Jack M. (2004). Patterns of Entrepreneurship Singapore. John Wiley and Sons 

 

Kroon, J. (editor) (1998). Entrepreneurship. Start your own Business Cape Town. Kagiso 
Education 

 

Kuratko, D.F. and Hodgetts, R.M. (1998). Entrepreneurship: A contemporary approach. Fourth 
edition New York. Dryden Press 

 

Megginson, Leon C., Byrd, Mary Jane and Megginson, William L. (2006). Small Business 
Management. An Entrepreneur’s Guidebook. Fifth edition Boston. Mc-Graw Hill 

 

Nieman, Gideon., Hough, Johan and Nieuwenhuizen, Cecile (Editors). (2003). 

Entrepreneurship: A South African Perspective Pretoria. Van Schaik 

 

Nieman G and Nieuwenhuizen (Editors) (2014) Entrepreneurship A South African Perspective 
Third edition. Van Schaik. Pretoria Chapter 

O’Neill, R.C., Terblanche, N.S. and Keyter, L (1997) Creative Entrepreneurship. 

Pretoria. Kagiso. 

 

Rwigema, Henry and Venter, Robert. (2004). Advanced Entrepreneurship 

Cape Town. Oxford University Press 

 

Rwigema, Urban and Venter (2011) Entrepreneurship: Theory in Practice Second edition. 
Oxford. Cape Town Chapter 

Sarwate, Dilip M (2004). Entrepreneurship Development and Project Management. Text and 
Cases Ahmednagar. Everest Publishing House 

 

 


Strydom J. (2012) Entrepreneurship and how to establish your own business. Fourth edition 
Juta. Cape Town Chapter 

Timmmons, Jeffry A. and Spinelli, Stephen, Jr. (2007). New Venture Creation. 
Entrepreneurship for the 21st century. Seventh edition Boston. Mc-Graw Hill 

 

Van Aardt, Isa and Van Aardt, Carel (1997).Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management 

Johannesburg. International Thomson Publishing 

 

Van Aardt I, Bezuidenhout S, Bendeman H, Booysen K, Clarence W, Massyn C, Moos, Naidoo 
P, Swanepoel E, Van Aardt C (2014) Entrepreneurship and New Venture Management Fifth 
edition. Oxford. Cape Town Chapter 

Wickham, Philip A.(2001). Strategic Entrepreneurship. A Decision Making approach to New 
Venture Creation and Management. Second edition Harlow. Prentice-Hall 

 

Zimmerer, Thomas W. and Scarborough, Norman M. (2005) Essentials of Entrepreneurship and 
Small Business Management. Fourth edition New Delhi. Prentice-Hall 

 

 

INTERNET 

www.google.co.za 

https://www.google.co.za/entrpreneurship 

http://www.entrepreneurship.co.za/ 

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/088390269390032Z 

https://ideas.repec.org/a/icf/icfjme/v03y2005i4p39-45.html 

http://blog.oxfordcollegeofmarketing.com/2014/11/04/the-impact-of-micro-and-macro-
environment-factors-on-marketing/ 

 

 


